form - Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Go Into The Story Scott Myers Follow Oct 6 · 9 min read · Member-only Save Tarantino, Sorkin, and Dialogue as Purpose Analysis of long dialogue-centric scenes in  The Social Network  and  Pulp Fiction  reveals that underneath the entertaining conversations lies their respective narrative function: to move the plot forward. Quentin Tarantino and Aaron Sorkin In a recent online class I taught on dialogue, the writers taking the course and I had some really enlightening discussions including this one about two masters in this arena: Aaron Sorkin and Quentin Tarantino. Both of them are known for the occasional long dialogue-laden scene and we might be tempted to interpret these as just being about entertainment. Read this excerpt from my first lecture which precipitated the online conversation, considering the screenwriting principle Dialogue = Purpose. The first 8+ pages of  The Social Network  script would appear to be the very epitome of  purposelessness . Apart from introducing two key characters — Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) and Erica (Rooney Mara) — the dialogue zigs and zags from one topic to the next, a confused quilt of references and observations. Here is a list of topics in the scene: People with genius IQs in China How to “distinguish yourself” amongst people who got 1600 on SAT’s A Capella choir, rowing crew, inventing a “25 dollar PC” Final club World class athletes rowing crew How girls like cowboys Exclusivity Various final clubs at Harvard with the Porc being the “best of the best” Theodore Roosevelt Mark’s friend Eduardo made $300,000 betting on oil futures Predicting weather and the price of heating oil Spat about Erica asking which final club is the “easiest to get into” Spat about Erica calling it “finals” club Spat about Erica calling Mark “obsessed,” he says he’s “motivated” Mark thinks Erica speaks in “code” Mark says “I need to do something substantial” to get the “attention” of the clubs Mark: “Because they’re exclusive. And fun and they lead to a better life.” Mark: “You should be a lot more supportive,” benefits for her if he was in a club She tells him she is no longer his girlfriend Mark says Erica used to sleep with the door guy of the club they’re drinking in Erica gets angry and says she’s leaving Mark tries to apologize Erica says dating Mark is “exhausting” Mark disparages B.U. (Boston University) where Erica goes to college Erica delivers two “stingers” and leaves him 8 plus pages. 111 sides of dialogue. Where is the purpose in this scene? Dialogue conveys exposition : If we define exposition as information, data, and backstory, we can see how Sorkin laces a lot of it into these pages: Information: Mark attends Harvard; Erica attends B.U.; the Porcellian is the most exclusive final club at Harvard; Teddy Roosevelt was a Porc. Data: The number of geniuses in China; Eduardo made $300K last year. Backstory: Mark got 1600 on his SAT; Mark and Erica have been romantically involved; Mark thinks Erica used to sleep with the door guy. This exposition is key in establishing the story’s setting (contemporary Harvard) and some of the basics of the Protagonist (Mark) and Attractor (Erica) characters. Dialogue reveals a character’s inner life : Through text and subtext, Sorkin conveys important aspects of both Mark and Erica’s thoughts and feelings: Mark: He is looking to distinguish himself; he feels pressure to do “something substantial” with his life; his reaction to Erica’s comment about the easiest final club shows he has personal insecurities; he thinks she should be more supportive of his desire to join a final club; Mark is dismissive of B.U. as an academic institution; his goal is a “better life.” Erica: She thinks Mark is “obsessed” with final clubs; she has a difficult time following Mark’s way of thinking and talking; she gets angry at Mark’s insensitivity (i.e., door guy accusation, derision of B.U. and by extension her own intellect); she finds being with Mark “exhausting.” The purpose of this facet of the scene’s dialogue is to go beyond exposition and provide readers a deeper insight into the inner workings of these two pivotal characters. Dialogue distinguishes one character from another : In what they say and how they say it, Sorkin creates a clear sense of Mark and Erica’s individual identities: Mark: He is extremely, almost excessively verbal; he is kinetic, his ideas spewing forth; he carries on his own internal conversation that often loses Erica; he is essentially humorless. Erica: Less intelligent, but smarter socially; she tries to use humor to make points (“You don’t care if side effects may include  blindness , okay, just do it,” “What part of Long Island are you from — England”); she is primarily reactive to him; she does not waffle in her decision to break up with him. There is also this subtle distinction between them. Whereas Erica is actually hurt by Mark’s derisive comments, unintentional though they may be, when Erica dumps him, Mark doesn’t feel distress so much as shock, as if it is unfathomable she would have any reason to terminate their relationship. At this level of purpose, Sorkin not only distinguishes the two characters in terms of the text of their words, but also the subtext, the deeper emotional meaning  under  their words. Dialogue moves the plot forward : Within the realm of a story universe, perhaps the single most important purpose of dialogue is to advance the plot. On the surface this extended exchange between these two characters in  The Social Network  seems precisely like a conversation with little or no substantive part to play in terms of the narrative. A closer examination reveals the scene moves the plot ahead in two ways: (1) The scene itself has a clear Beginning, Middle and End; (2) Its end point is a critical event that sets into motion everything else that follows in the plot. Scene structure: The Beginning of the scene revolves around establishing Mark’s powerful desire to get into a final club. The Middle involves Erica calling into question Mark’s obsession while Mark challenges her to support him, and in so doing provides one dismissive comment toward her after another. The Ending centers on Erica breaking up with Mark. Point of the scene: It’s the break-up and specifically Erica’s final lines to Mark as she leaves: Here is the scene from the movie: The point of the scene is two-fold: (1) Erica breaks up with Mark. (2) Erica’s parting shot becomes a verbal talisman to inspire Mark to make something of himself and join a final club. The scene’s ending dialogue caps off this key purpose of the scene tied to the plot. Mark Walker, one of the writers in the class, responded with this: I think that is a key observation that those new to screenwriting (like myself) need to get into their heads. I think, when I started out, I was probably of the mind that dialogue wasn’t as important as the scene description and visual “delivery” of the film. As I have wised up a bit (there is still a lot of room for further improvement) from reading books and blogs, and the SMC (Screenwriting Master Class), it has become clearer just how powerful good dialogue can be, let alone great dialogue. it is interesting to watch films knowing this and think about how the dialogue works so well. Scott’s example clearly shows this, and how it is an art to make it look like conversation when it actually isn’t. To throw all that stuff at you that you probably don’t recognize as character building and exposition until later in the movie when you get those call-backs that relate to some of that conversation and it all clicks into place, is a vital skill. I would compare this to Tarantino introducing Jules and Vincent as they approach the building where the guys with Marcellus’ brief case are waiting. An excerpt: Here’s the scene from the movie: I think we get all four of Scott’s purposes in that conversation which, on the surface of it, sounds like two guys just chewing the fat about work and shit. But we hear about (amongst everything else): Vincent being in Amsterdam — he has been away and missed some stuff We get banter about their weapons which tells us they are gangsters/hitmen….dangerous Jules is catching him up about the guy that gave Mia foot massage This tells us their boss is a hard man not to be messed with We hear Vincent has been asked to “take her out” while Marcellus is away — setting up the next part of the story. Jules concern in relation to foot massages tells us more about their boss and theor perception of him. The dialogue tells us about the suitcase Macguffin. We get to learn that Vincent and Jules are very different — Jules is respectful and more refined than Vincent who is a little more brash — all found from a conversation about giving foot massages We get everything; exposition, inner life of the characters, we learn how they are different from each other and plot moves forward with regards the macguffin. By the time we are ready to kick the door down we know exactly who these two guys are, what they do for a living and who they work for, as well as a bit about their past and what is in store for them (or at least Vincent) in the next chapter. None of the dialogue is “wasted” or “filler” — like everything else with screenwriting — if it doesn’t serve the story, does it need to be cut? That example you cite from  Pulp Fiction  works as entertainment straight-out, thus if we don’t look closer, we may assume it’s just QT riffing with dialogue, pure and simple. But if we  do  examine the content, we see, as you pointed out so well with your analysis, Mark, that there is a purpose to the conversation; in fact,  several  of them, in effect setting up a few important subplots. A comparison of this scene and the opening to  The Social Network  reveals that everything hangs on the dialogue’s tie-in to and advancement of the plot. In fact, if one were to boil down each scene to the single most important contribution each makes to the plot, it’s right there: Pulp Fiction : To establish the upcoming “date” Vincent is going to have with Mia and the pressure he will be under to handle that properly re Marcellus and his temper. That sets everything in that subplot into motion including Vincent scoring the heroin as a way of taking the edge of the date which leads to Mia overdosing on it (thinking it’s cocaine), and so forth. The Social Network : The breakup of Mark and Erica which, as the denouement shows [even though the entirety of their subplot is only four or five beats], provides one huge motivation on Mark’s part to succeed: To prove he has worth in response to her rejection of him. Takeaway: Dialogue = Purpose. This is true even if you go off on a riff à la Tarantino and Sorkin. Tie the dialogue to those four markers, but most especially to the advancement of the plot. I don’t care how good you are with dialogue, if you write a scene in which the dialogue has zero impact on the plot, you should consider reshaping the scene to make it relevant to the plot or drop the scene entirely as being extraneous. What are your thoughts about how important dialogue is to plot? Comment Archive -- -- 1 More from Go Into The Story Follow Official Screenwriting Blog of The Black List Read more from    Go Into The Story Recommended from Medium Robert Ralph in New Writers Welcome How to add a signature file Ilana Quinn in Writers’ Blokke How to Research for Historical Fiction Sakshi Udavant (Luna) in The Brave Writer A Client Just Rejected My Work And I Have Never Been Happier Ellie Jacobson Get Your Write On: Setting Yourself Up for NaNoWriMo Success Sherry McGuinn in Rogues’ Gallery Men, Got a Problem With the Ladies? Jessica A in The Book Mechanic 4 Personal Qualities All Successful Writers Share Rosa de Saron C. in Publishing Well Is Writing Long Form Really Worth It Scott A. Gese in Success in Mind Medium: Are You Sure You Want to Take This Ride? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Scott Myers 35K Followers Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Pavan Kashyap Google's Achilles' Heel: Enabling Conversations Seoananthinfo SAP Helps Customers Map Their Road to the Intelligent Enterprise Rinku Prakash in iSchedul Impact of No Shows on Businesses and Economy & the Role of Technology on Mitigation Axial in Axial Axial S-1 Club — 908 Devices ْ Kerry Logistics picks up 50% in Indev Logistics for Rs.500-Cr Christine Russo Got 15 Minutes? Ethiopia COVID-19 Response Team in Africa COVID-19 Response Toolkit: The Blog 5 key steps in mobilizing COVID-19 response efforts in Africa Fintech Decoded in Fintech M&A Open Banking is rewiring the payments infrastructure About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 465 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Hi there, thank you for the review and the exhaustive feedback! Our team is currently looking into the issues that you reported, and you might see some of them resolved in one of the upcoming app updates. If you have any more suggestions or need help with anything else, please let us know by contacting us via the support form at help.medium.com. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Brett Johnson Open The Mic Newsletter — Podcast News Jbetancourt Fake News Major Writing Assignment Rani Yadav-Ranjan Fake news is not new! Ajit Pai The Need for Speed Aya Schechner CEO Snippets: David Walmsley, Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail Andrey Abasin Epoch Media Casts Wider Net to Spread Its Message Online Kathryn Fraser The Symbol of Survival: The Media Impact on Kalief Browder Ameera AlSaid in Doha News Will Qatar’s print media survive COVID-19? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 462 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 12 min read Medium Terms of Service Effective: September 1, 2020 You can see our previous Terms  here . Thanks for using Medium. Our mission is to deepen people’s understanding of the world and spread ideas that matter. These Terms of Service (“ Terms ”) apply to your access to and use of the websites, mobile applications and other online products and services (collectively, the “ Services ”) provided by A Medium Corporation (“ Medium ” or “ we ”).  By clicking your consent (e.g. “Continue,” “Sign-in,” or “Sign-up,”) or by using our Services, you agree to these Terms, including the mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver in the Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration Section. Our  Privacy Policy  explains how we collect and use your information while our  Rules  outline your responsibilities when using our Services. By using our Services, you’re agreeing to be bound by these Terms and our Rules. Please see our  Privacy Policy  for information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you. If you have any questions about these Terms or our Services, please contact us at  legal@medium.com . Your Account and Responsibilities You’re responsible for your use of the Services and any content you provide, including compliance with applicable laws. Content on the Services may be protected by others’ intellectual property rights. Please don’t copy, upload, download, or share content unless you have the right to do so. Your use of the Services must comply with our Rules. You may need to register for an account to access some or all of our Services. Help us keep your account protected. Safeguard your password to the account, and keep your account information current. We recommend that you do not share your password with others. If you’re accepting these Terms and using the Services on behalf of someone else (such as another person or entity), you represent that you’re authorized to do so, and in that case the words “you” or “your” in these Terms include that other person or entity. To use our Services, you must be at least 13 years old. If you use the Services to access, collect, or use personal information about other Medium users (“Personal Information”), you agree to do so in compliance with applicable laws. You further agree not to sell any Personal Information, where the term “sell” has the meaning given to it under applicable laws. For Personal Information you provide to us (e.g. as a Newsletter Editor), you represent and warrant that you have lawfully collected the Personal Information and that you or a third party has provided all required notices and collected all required consents before collecting the Personal Information. You further represent and warrant that Medium’s use of such Personal Information in accordance with the purposes for which you provided us the Personal Information will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) and will not cause us to violate any applicable laws. User Content on the Services Medium may review your conduct and content for compliance with these Terms and our Rules, and reserves the right to remove any violating content. Medium reserves the right to delete or disable content alleged to be infringing the intellectual property rights of others, and to terminate accounts of repeat infringers. We respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement if they comply with the law; please report such notices using our  Copyright Policy . Rights and Ownership You retain your rights to any content you submit, post or display on or through the Services.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, by submitting, posting, or displaying content on or through the Services, you grant Medium a nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your content in all media formats and distribution methods now known or later developed on the Services. Medium needs this license because you own your content and Medium therefore can’t display it across its various surfaces (i.e., mobile, web) without your permission. This type of license also is needed to distribute your content across our Services. For example, you post a story on Medium. It is reproduced as versions on both our website and app, and distributed to multiple places within Medium, such as the homepage or reading lists. A modification might be that we show a snippet of your work (and not the full post) in a preview, with attribution to you. A derivative work might be a list of top authors or quotes on Medium that uses portions of your content, again with full attribution. This license applies to our Services only, and does not grant us any permissions outside of our Services. So long as you comply with these Terms, Medium gives you a limited, personal, non-exclusive, and non-assignable license to access and use our Services. The Services are protected by copyright, trademark, and other US and foreign laws. These Terms don’t grant you any right, title or interest in the Services, other users’ content on the Services, or Medium trademarks, logos or other brand features. Separate and apart from the content you submit, post or display on our Services, we welcome feedback, including any comments, ideas and suggestions you have about our Services. We may use this feedback for any purpose, in our sole discretion, without any obligation to you. We may treat feedback as nonconfidential. We may stop providing the Services or any of its features within our sole discretion. We also retain the right to create limits on use and storage and may remove or limit content distribution on the Services. Termination You’re free to stop using our Services at any time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your access to the Services with or without notice. Transfer and Processing Data In order for us to provide our Services, you agree that we may process, transfer and store information about you in the US and other countries, where you may not have the same rights and protections as you do under local law. Indemnification To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you will indemnify, defend and hold harmless Medium, and our officers, directors, agents, partners and employees (individually and collectively, the  “Medium Parties” ) from and against any losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, expenses or costs ( “Claims” ) arising out of or related to your violation, misappropriation or infringement of any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) or your violation of the law. You agree to promptly notify Medium Parties of any third-party Claims, cooperate with Medium Parties in defending such Claims and pay all fees, costs and expenses associated with defending such Claims (including attorneys’ fees). You also agree that the Medium Parties will have control of the defense or settlement, at Medium’s sole option, of any third-party Claims. Disclaimers — Service is “As Is” Medium aims to give you great Services but there are some things we can’t guarantee. Your use of our Services is at your sole risk. You understand that our Services and any content posted or shared by users on the Services are provided “as is” and “as available” without warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title, and non-infringement. In addition, Medium doesn’t represent or warrant that our Services are accurate, complete, reliable, current or error-free. No advice or information obtained from Medium or through the Services will create any warranty or representation not expressly made in this paragraph. Medium may provide information about third-party products, services, activities or events, or we may allow third parties to make their content and information available on or through our Services (collectively, “ Third-Party Content ”). We do not control or endorse, and we make no representations or warranties regarding, any Third-Party Content. You access and use Third-Party Content at your own risk. Some locations don’t allow the disclaimers in this paragraph and so they might not apply to you. Limitation of Liability We don’t exclude or limit our liability to you where it would be illegal to do so; this includes any liability for the gross negligence, fraud or intentional misconduct of Medium or the other Medium Parties in providing the Services. In countries where the following types of exclusions aren’t allowed, we’re responsible to you only for losses and damages that are a reasonably foreseeable result of our failure to use reasonable care and skill or our breach of our contract with you. This paragraph doesn’t affect consumer rights that can’t be waived or limited by any contract or agreement. In countries where exclusions or limitations of liability are allowed, Medium and Medium Parties won’t be liable for: (a)   Any indirect, consequential, exemplary, incidental, punitive, or special damages, or any loss of use, data or profits, under any legal theory, even if Medium or the other Medium Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages. (b)   Other than for the types of liability we can’t limit by law (as described in this section), we limit the total liability of Medium and the other Medium Parties for any claim arising out of or relating to these Terms or our Services, regardless of the form of the action, to the greater of $50.00 USD or the amount paid by you to use our Services. Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration We want to address your concerns without needing a formal legal case. Before filing a claim against Medium, you agree to contact us and attempt to resolve the claim informally by sending a written notice of your claim by email at legal@medium.com or by certified mail addressed to A Medium Corporation, P.O. Box 602, San Francisco, CA 94104. The notice must (a) include your name, residence address, email address, and telephone number; (b) describe the nature and basis of the claim; and (c) set forth the specific relief sought. Our notice to you will be sent to the email address associated with your online account and will contain the information described above. If we can’t resolve matters within thirty (30) days after any notice is sent, either party may initiate a formal proceeding. Please read the following section carefully because it requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with Medium and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us, unless you opt out of arbitration by following the instructions set forth below. No class or representative actions or arbitrations are allowed under this arbitration provision. In addition, arbitration precludes you from suing in court or having a jury trial. (a)  No Representative Actions. You and Medium agree that any dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services is personal to you and Medium and that any dispute will be resolved solely through individual action, and will not be brought as a class arbitration, class action or any other type of representative proceeding. (b)  Arbitration of Disputes.  Except for small claims disputes in which you or Medium seeks to bring an individual action in small claims court located in the county where you reside or disputes in which you or Medium seeks injunctive or other equitable relief for the alleged infringement or misappropriation of intellectual property,  you and Medium waive your rights to a jury trial and to have any other dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services, including claims related to privacy and data security, (collectively, “ Disputes ”) resolved in court . All Disputes submitted to JAMS will be resolved through confidential, binding arbitration before one arbitrator. Arbitration proceedings will be held in San Francisco, California unless you’re a consumer, in which case you may elect to hold the arbitration in your county of residence. For purposes of this section a “ consumer ” means a person using the Services for personal, family or household purposes. You and Medium agree that Disputes will be held in accordance with the JAMS Streamlined Arbitration Rules and Procedures (“ JAMS Rules ”). The most recent version of the JAMS Rules are available on the  JAMS website  and are incorporated into these Terms by reference. You either acknowledge and agree that you have read and understand the JAMS Rules or waive your opportunity to read the JAMS Rules and waive any claim that the JAMS Rules are unfair or should not apply for any reason. (c) You and Medium agree that these Terms affect interstate commerce and that the enforceability of this section will be substantively and procedurally governed by the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1,  et seq . (the “ FAA ”), to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. As limited by the FAA, these Terms and the JAMS Rules, the arbitrator will have exclusive authority to make all procedural and substantive decisions regarding any Dispute and to grant any remedy that would otherwise be available in court, including the power to determine the question of arbitrability. The arbitrator may conduct only an individual arbitration and may not consolidate more than one individual’s claims, preside over any type of class or representative proceeding or preside over any proceeding involving more than one individual. (d) The arbitration will allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the Dispute. The arbitrator, Medium, and you will maintain the confidentiality of any arbitration proceedings, judgments and awards, including information gathered, prepared and presented for purposes of the arbitration or related to the Dispute(s) therein. The arbitrator will have the authority to make appropriate rulings to safeguard confidentiality, unless the law provides to the contrary. The duty of confidentiality doesn’t apply to the extent that disclosure is necessary to prepare for or conduct the arbitration hearing on the merits, in connection with a court application for a preliminary remedy, or in connection with a judicial challenge to an arbitration award or its enforcement, or to the extent that disclosure is otherwise required by law or judicial decision. (e) You and Medium agree that for any arbitration you initiate, you will pay the filing fee (up to a maximum of $250 if you are a consumer), and Medium will pay the remaining JAMS fees and costs. For any arbitration initiated by Medium, Medium will pay all JAMS fees and costs. You and Medium agree that the state or federal courts of the State of California and the United States sitting in San Francisco, California have exclusive jurisdiction over any appeals and the enforcement of an arbitration award. (f)  Any Dispute must be filed within one year after the relevant claim arose; otherwise, the Dispute is permanently barred, which means that you and Medium will not have the right to assert the claim. (g)  You have the right to opt out of binding arbitration within 30 days of the date you first accepted the terms of this section by sending an email of your request to  yourfriends@medium.com . In order to be effective, the opt-out notice must include your full name and address and clearly indicate your intent to opt out of binding arbitration. By opting out of binding arbitration, you are agreeing to resolve Disputes in accordance with the next section regarding “Governing Law and Venue.” (h) If any portion of this section is found to be unenforceable or unlawful for any reason, (1) the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall be severed from these Terms; (2) severance of the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall have no impact whatsoever on the remainder of this section or the parties’ ability to compel arbitration of any remaining claims on an individual basis pursuant to this section; and (3) to the extent that any claims must therefore proceed on a class, collective, consolidated, or representative basis, such claims must be litigated in a civil court of competent jurisdiction and not in arbitration, and the parties agree that litigation of those claims shall be stayed pending the outcome of any individual claims in arbitration. Further, if any part of this section is found to prohibit an individual claim seeking public injunctive relief, that provision will have no effect to the extent such relief is allowed to be sought out of arbitration, and the remainder of this section will be enforceable. Governing Law and Venue These Terms and any dispute that arises between you and Medium will be governed by California law except for its conflict of law principles. Any dispute between the parties that’s not subject to arbitration or can’t be heard in small claims court will be resolved in the state or federal courts of California and the United States, respectively, sitting in San Francisco, California. Some countries have laws that require agreements to be governed by the local laws of the consumer’s country. This paragraph doesn’t override those laws. Amendments We may make changes to these Terms from time to time. If we make changes, we’ll provide you with notice of them by sending an email to the email address associated with your account, offering an in-product notification, or updating the date at the top of these Terms. Unless we say otherwise in our notice, the amended Terms will be effective immediately, and your continued use of our Services after we provide such notice will confirm your acceptance of the changes. If you don’t agree to the amended Terms, you must stop using our Services. Severability If any provision or part of a provision of these Terms is unlawful, void or unenforceable, that provision or part of the provision is deemed severable from these Terms and does not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Miscellaneous Medium’s failure to exercise or enforce any right or provision of these Terms will not operate as a waiver of such right or provision. These Terms, and the terms and policies listed in the Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You Section, reflect the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior agreements, statements and understandings of the parties. The section titles in these Terms are for convenience only and have no legal or contractual effect. Use of the word “including” will be interpreted to mean “including without limitation.” Except as otherwise provided herein, these Terms are intended solely for the benefit of the parties and are not intended to confer third-party beneficiary rights upon any other person or entity. You agree that communications and transactions between us may be conducted electronically. Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You -  Medium Rules -  Partner Program Terms -  Membership Terms of Service -  Username Policy -  Custom Domains Terms of Service -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium SheHacksPurple in DevOps Dudes Security is Everybody’s Job — Part 1 — DevSecOps SkyNet Tools Vulnnr — Vulnerability Scanner & Auto Exploiter itSynergy 5 Cybersecurity Misconceptions That Need to Be Debunked phbits OpenSSL Root Certificate Authority Afolic Setting up Burpsuite for your web penetration testing Shashwat Singh Critical Controls to Secure OpenSSH Installation Auditchain AUDITCHAIN ANNOUNCES PHASE 2 BOUNTY CAMPAIGN! Cyrex Security Explained: Fear the Peer-to-Peer About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

act - Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 12 min read Medium Terms of Service Effective: September 1, 2020 You can see our previous Terms  here . Thanks for using Medium. Our mission is to deepen people’s understanding of the world and spread ideas that matter. These Terms of Service (“ Terms ”) apply to your access to and use of the websites, mobile applications and other online products and services (collectively, the “ Services ”) provided by A Medium Corporation (“ Medium ” or “ we ”).  By clicking your consent (e.g. “Continue,” “Sign-in,” or “Sign-up,”) or by using our Services, you agree to these Terms, including the mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver in the Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration Section. Our  Privacy Policy  explains how we collect and use your information while our  Rules  outline your responsibilities when using our Services. By using our Services, you’re agreeing to be bound by these Terms and our Rules. Please see our  Privacy Policy  for information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you. If you have any questions about these Terms or our Services, please contact us at  legal@medium.com . Your Account and Responsibilities You’re responsible for your use of the Services and any content you provide, including compliance with applicable laws. Content on the Services may be protected by others’ intellectual property rights. Please don’t copy, upload, download, or share content unless you have the right to do so. Your use of the Services must comply with our Rules. You may need to register for an account to access some or all of our Services. Help us keep your account protected. Safeguard your password to the account, and keep your account information current. We recommend that you do not share your password with others. If you’re accepting these Terms and using the Services on behalf of someone else (such as another person or entity), you represent that you’re authorized to do so, and in that case the words “you” or “your” in these Terms include that other person or entity. To use our Services, you must be at least 13 years old. If you use the Services to access, collect, or use personal information about other Medium users (“Personal Information”), you agree to do so in compliance with applicable laws. You further agree not to sell any Personal Information, where the term “sell” has the meaning given to it under applicable laws. For Personal Information you provide to us (e.g. as a Newsletter Editor), you represent and warrant that you have lawfully collected the Personal Information and that you or a third party has provided all required notices and collected all required consents before collecting the Personal Information. You further represent and warrant that Medium’s use of such Personal Information in accordance with the purposes for which you provided us the Personal Information will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) and will not cause us to violate any applicable laws. User Content on the Services Medium may review your conduct and content for compliance with these Terms and our Rules, and reserves the right to remove any violating content. Medium reserves the right to delete or disable content alleged to be infringing the intellectual property rights of others, and to terminate accounts of repeat infringers. We respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement if they comply with the law; please report such notices using our  Copyright Policy . Rights and Ownership You retain your rights to any content you submit, post or display on or through the Services.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, by submitting, posting, or displaying content on or through the Services, you grant Medium a nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your content in all media formats and distribution methods now known or later developed on the Services. Medium needs this license because you own your content and Medium therefore can’t display it across its various surfaces (i.e., mobile, web) without your permission. This type of license also is needed to distribute your content across our Services. For example, you post a story on Medium. It is reproduced as versions on both our website and app, and distributed to multiple places within Medium, such as the homepage or reading lists. A modification might be that we show a snippet of your work (and not the full post) in a preview, with attribution to you. A derivative work might be a list of top authors or quotes on Medium that uses portions of your content, again with full attribution. This license applies to our Services only, and does not grant us any permissions outside of our Services. So long as you comply with these Terms, Medium gives you a limited, personal, non-exclusive, and non-assignable license to access and use our Services. The Services are protected by copyright, trademark, and other US and foreign laws. These Terms don’t grant you any right, title or interest in the Services, other users’ content on the Services, or Medium trademarks, logos or other brand features. Separate and apart from the content you submit, post or display on our Services, we welcome feedback, including any comments, ideas and suggestions you have about our Services. We may use this feedback for any purpose, in our sole discretion, without any obligation to you. We may treat feedback as nonconfidential. We may stop providing the Services or any of its features within our sole discretion. We also retain the right to create limits on use and storage and may remove or limit content distribution on the Services. Termination You’re free to stop using our Services at any time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your access to the Services with or without notice. Transfer and Processing Data In order for us to provide our Services, you agree that we may process, transfer and store information about you in the US and other countries, where you may not have the same rights and protections as you do under local law. Indemnification To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you will indemnify, defend and hold harmless Medium, and our officers, directors, agents, partners and employees (individually and collectively, the  “Medium Parties” ) from and against any losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, expenses or costs ( “Claims” ) arising out of or related to your violation, misappropriation or infringement of any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) or your violation of the law. You agree to promptly notify Medium Parties of any third-party Claims, cooperate with Medium Parties in defending such Claims and pay all fees, costs and expenses associated with defending such Claims (including attorneys’ fees). You also agree that the Medium Parties will have control of the defense or settlement, at Medium’s sole option, of any third-party Claims. Disclaimers — Service is “As Is” Medium aims to give you great Services but there are some things we can’t guarantee. Your use of our Services is at your sole risk. You understand that our Services and any content posted or shared by users on the Services are provided “as is” and “as available” without warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title, and non-infringement. In addition, Medium doesn’t represent or warrant that our Services are accurate, complete, reliable, current or error-free. No advice or information obtained from Medium or through the Services will create any warranty or representation not expressly made in this paragraph. Medium may provide information about third-party products, services, activities or events, or we may allow third parties to make their content and information available on or through our Services (collectively, “ Third-Party Content ”). We do not control or endorse, and we make no representations or warranties regarding, any Third-Party Content. You access and use Third-Party Content at your own risk. Some locations don’t allow the disclaimers in this paragraph and so they might not apply to you. Limitation of Liability We don’t exclude or limit our liability to you where it would be illegal to do so; this includes any liability for the gross negligence, fraud or intentional misconduct of Medium or the other Medium Parties in providing the Services. In countries where the following types of exclusions aren’t allowed, we’re responsible to you only for losses and damages that are a reasonably foreseeable result of our failure to use reasonable care and skill or our breach of our contract with you. This paragraph doesn’t affect consumer rights that can’t be waived or limited by any contract or agreement. In countries where exclusions or limitations of liability are allowed, Medium and Medium Parties won’t be liable for: (a)   Any indirect, consequential, exemplary, incidental, punitive, or special damages, or any loss of use, data or profits, under any legal theory, even if Medium or the other Medium Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages. (b)   Other than for the types of liability we can’t limit by law (as described in this section), we limit the total liability of Medium and the other Medium Parties for any claim arising out of or relating to these Terms or our Services, regardless of the form of the action, to the greater of $50.00 USD or the amount paid by you to use our Services. Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration We want to address your concerns without needing a formal legal case. Before filing a claim against Medium, you agree to contact us and attempt to resolve the claim informally by sending a written notice of your claim by email at legal@medium.com or by certified mail addressed to A Medium Corporation, P.O. Box 602, San Francisco, CA 94104. The notice must (a) include your name, residence address, email address, and telephone number; (b) describe the nature and basis of the claim; and (c) set forth the specific relief sought. Our notice to you will be sent to the email address associated with your online account and will contain the information described above. If we can’t resolve matters within thirty (30) days after any notice is sent, either party may initiate a formal proceeding. Please read the following section carefully because it requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with Medium and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us, unless you opt out of arbitration by following the instructions set forth below. No class or representative actions or arbitrations are allowed under this arbitration provision. In addition, arbitration precludes you from suing in court or having a jury trial. (a)  No Representative Actions. You and Medium agree that any dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services is personal to you and Medium and that any dispute will be resolved solely through individual action, and will not be brought as a class arbitration, class action or any other type of representative proceeding. (b)  Arbitration of Disputes.  Except for small claims disputes in which you or Medium seeks to bring an individual action in small claims court located in the county where you reside or disputes in which you or Medium seeks injunctive or other equitable relief for the alleged infringement or misappropriation of intellectual property,  you and Medium waive your rights to a jury trial and to have any other dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services, including claims related to privacy and data security, (collectively, “ Disputes ”) resolved in court . All Disputes submitted to JAMS will be resolved through confidential, binding arbitration before one arbitrator. Arbitration proceedings will be held in San Francisco, California unless you’re a consumer, in which case you may elect to hold the arbitration in your county of residence. For purposes of this section a “ consumer ” means a person using the Services for personal, family or household purposes. You and Medium agree that Disputes will be held in accordance with the JAMS Streamlined Arbitration Rules and Procedures (“ JAMS Rules ”). The most recent version of the JAMS Rules are available on the  JAMS website  and are incorporated into these Terms by reference. You either acknowledge and agree that you have read and understand the JAMS Rules or waive your opportunity to read the JAMS Rules and waive any claim that the JAMS Rules are unfair or should not apply for any reason. (c) You and Medium agree that these Terms affect interstate commerce and that the enforceability of this section will be substantively and procedurally governed by the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1,  et seq . (the “ FAA ”), to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. As limited by the FAA, these Terms and the JAMS Rules, the arbitrator will have exclusive authority to make all procedural and substantive decisions regarding any Dispute and to grant any remedy that would otherwise be available in court, including the power to determine the question of arbitrability. The arbitrator may conduct only an individual arbitration and may not consolidate more than one individual’s claims, preside over any type of class or representative proceeding or preside over any proceeding involving more than one individual. (d) The arbitration will allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the Dispute. The arbitrator, Medium, and you will maintain the confidentiality of any arbitration proceedings, judgments and awards, including information gathered, prepared and presented for purposes of the arbitration or related to the Dispute(s) therein. The arbitrator will have the authority to make appropriate rulings to safeguard confidentiality, unless the law provides to the contrary. The duty of confidentiality doesn’t apply to the extent that disclosure is necessary to prepare for or conduct the arbitration hearing on the merits, in connection with a court application for a preliminary remedy, or in connection with a judicial challenge to an arbitration award or its enforcement, or to the extent that disclosure is otherwise required by law or judicial decision. (e) You and Medium agree that for any arbitration you initiate, you will pay the filing fee (up to a maximum of $250 if you are a consumer), and Medium will pay the remaining JAMS fees and costs. For any arbitration initiated by Medium, Medium will pay all JAMS fees and costs. You and Medium agree that the state or federal courts of the State of California and the United States sitting in San Francisco, California have exclusive jurisdiction over any appeals and the enforcement of an arbitration award. (f)  Any Dispute must be filed within one year after the relevant claim arose; otherwise, the Dispute is permanently barred, which means that you and Medium will not have the right to assert the claim. (g)  You have the right to opt out of binding arbitration within 30 days of the date you first accepted the terms of this section by sending an email of your request to  yourfriends@medium.com . In order to be effective, the opt-out notice must include your full name and address and clearly indicate your intent to opt out of binding arbitration. By opting out of binding arbitration, you are agreeing to resolve Disputes in accordance with the next section regarding “Governing Law and Venue.” (h) If any portion of this section is found to be unenforceable or unlawful for any reason, (1) the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall be severed from these Terms; (2) severance of the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall have no impact whatsoever on the remainder of this section or the parties’ ability to compel arbitration of any remaining claims on an individual basis pursuant to this section; and (3) to the extent that any claims must therefore proceed on a class, collective, consolidated, or representative basis, such claims must be litigated in a civil court of competent jurisdiction and not in arbitration, and the parties agree that litigation of those claims shall be stayed pending the outcome of any individual claims in arbitration. Further, if any part of this section is found to prohibit an individual claim seeking public injunctive relief, that provision will have no effect to the extent such relief is allowed to be sought out of arbitration, and the remainder of this section will be enforceable. Governing Law and Venue These Terms and any dispute that arises between you and Medium will be governed by California law except for its conflict of law principles. Any dispute between the parties that’s not subject to arbitration or can’t be heard in small claims court will be resolved in the state or federal courts of California and the United States, respectively, sitting in San Francisco, California. Some countries have laws that require agreements to be governed by the local laws of the consumer’s country. This paragraph doesn’t override those laws. Amendments We may make changes to these Terms from time to time. If we make changes, we’ll provide you with notice of them by sending an email to the email address associated with your account, offering an in-product notification, or updating the date at the top of these Terms. Unless we say otherwise in our notice, the amended Terms will be effective immediately, and your continued use of our Services after we provide such notice will confirm your acceptance of the changes. If you don’t agree to the amended Terms, you must stop using our Services. Severability If any provision or part of a provision of these Terms is unlawful, void or unenforceable, that provision or part of the provision is deemed severable from these Terms and does not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Miscellaneous Medium’s failure to exercise or enforce any right or provision of these Terms will not operate as a waiver of such right or provision. These Terms, and the terms and policies listed in the Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You Section, reflect the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior agreements, statements and understandings of the parties. The section titles in these Terms are for convenience only and have no legal or contractual effect. Use of the word “including” will be interpreted to mean “including without limitation.” Except as otherwise provided herein, these Terms are intended solely for the benefit of the parties and are not intended to confer third-party beneficiary rights upon any other person or entity. You agree that communications and transactions between us may be conducted electronically. Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You -  Medium Rules -  Partner Program Terms -  Membership Terms of Service -  Username Policy -  Custom Domains Terms of Service -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium SheHacksPurple in DevOps Dudes Security is Everybody’s Job — Part 1 — DevSecOps SkyNet Tools Vulnnr — Vulnerability Scanner & Auto Exploiter itSynergy 5 Cybersecurity Misconceptions That Need to Be Debunked phbits OpenSSL Root Certificate Authority Afolic Setting up Burpsuite for your web penetration testing Shashwat Singh Critical Controls to Secure OpenSSH Installation Auditchain AUDITCHAIN ANNOUNCES PHASE 2 BOUNTY CAMPAIGN! Cyrex Security Explained: Fear the Peer-to-Peer About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

work - Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Go Into The Story Scott Myers Follow Oct 6 · 9 min read · Member-only Save Tarantino, Sorkin, and Dialogue as Purpose Analysis of long dialogue-centric scenes in  The Social Network  and  Pulp Fiction  reveals that underneath the entertaining conversations lies their respective narrative function: to move the plot forward. Quentin Tarantino and Aaron Sorkin In a recent online class I taught on dialogue, the writers taking the course and I had some really enlightening discussions including this one about two masters in this arena: Aaron Sorkin and Quentin Tarantino. Both of them are known for the occasional long dialogue-laden scene and we might be tempted to interpret these as just being about entertainment. Read this excerpt from my first lecture which precipitated the online conversation, considering the screenwriting principle Dialogue = Purpose. The first 8+ pages of  The Social Network  script would appear to be the very epitome of  purposelessness . Apart from introducing two key characters — Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) and Erica (Rooney Mara) — the dialogue zigs and zags from one topic to the next, a confused quilt of references and observations. Here is a list of topics in the scene: People with genius IQs in China How to “distinguish yourself” amongst people who got 1600 on SAT’s A Capella choir, rowing crew, inventing a “25 dollar PC” Final club World class athletes rowing crew How girls like cowboys Exclusivity Various final clubs at Harvard with the Porc being the “best of the best” Theodore Roosevelt Mark’s friend Eduardo made $300,000 betting on oil futures Predicting weather and the price of heating oil Spat about Erica asking which final club is the “easiest to get into” Spat about Erica calling it “finals” club Spat about Erica calling Mark “obsessed,” he says he’s “motivated” Mark thinks Erica speaks in “code” Mark says “I need to do something substantial” to get the “attention” of the clubs Mark: “Because they’re exclusive. And fun and they lead to a better life.” Mark: “You should be a lot more supportive,” benefits for her if he was in a club She tells him she is no longer his girlfriend Mark says Erica used to sleep with the door guy of the club they’re drinking in Erica gets angry and says she’s leaving Mark tries to apologize Erica says dating Mark is “exhausting” Mark disparages B.U. (Boston University) where Erica goes to college Erica delivers two “stingers” and leaves him 8 plus pages. 111 sides of dialogue. Where is the purpose in this scene? Dialogue conveys exposition : If we define exposition as information, data, and backstory, we can see how Sorkin laces a lot of it into these pages: Information: Mark attends Harvard; Erica attends B.U.; the Porcellian is the most exclusive final club at Harvard; Teddy Roosevelt was a Porc. Data: The number of geniuses in China; Eduardo made $300K last year. Backstory: Mark got 1600 on his SAT; Mark and Erica have been romantically involved; Mark thinks Erica used to sleep with the door guy. This exposition is key in establishing the story’s setting (contemporary Harvard) and some of the basics of the Protagonist (Mark) and Attractor (Erica) characters. Dialogue reveals a character’s inner life : Through text and subtext, Sorkin conveys important aspects of both Mark and Erica’s thoughts and feelings: Mark: He is looking to distinguish himself; he feels pressure to do “something substantial” with his life; his reaction to Erica’s comment about the easiest final club shows he has personal insecurities; he thinks she should be more supportive of his desire to join a final club; Mark is dismissive of B.U. as an academic institution; his goal is a “better life.” Erica: She thinks Mark is “obsessed” with final clubs; she has a difficult time following Mark’s way of thinking and talking; she gets angry at Mark’s insensitivity (i.e., door guy accusation, derision of B.U. and by extension her own intellect); she finds being with Mark “exhausting.” The purpose of this facet of the scene’s dialogue is to go beyond exposition and provide readers a deeper insight into the inner workings of these two pivotal characters. Dialogue distinguishes one character from another : In what they say and how they say it, Sorkin creates a clear sense of Mark and Erica’s individual identities: Mark: He is extremely, almost excessively verbal; he is kinetic, his ideas spewing forth; he carries on his own internal conversation that often loses Erica; he is essentially humorless. Erica: Less intelligent, but smarter socially; she tries to use humor to make points (“You don’t care if side effects may include  blindness , okay, just do it,” “What part of Long Island are you from — England”); she is primarily reactive to him; she does not waffle in her decision to break up with him. There is also this subtle distinction between them. Whereas Erica is actually hurt by Mark’s derisive comments, unintentional though they may be, when Erica dumps him, Mark doesn’t feel distress so much as shock, as if it is unfathomable she would have any reason to terminate their relationship. At this level of purpose, Sorkin not only distinguishes the two characters in terms of the text of their words, but also the subtext, the deeper emotional meaning  under  their words. Dialogue moves the plot forward : Within the realm of a story universe, perhaps the single most important purpose of dialogue is to advance the plot. On the surface this extended exchange between these two characters in  The Social Network  seems precisely like a conversation with little or no substantive part to play in terms of the narrative. A closer examination reveals the scene moves the plot ahead in two ways: (1) The scene itself has a clear Beginning, Middle and End; (2) Its end point is a critical event that sets into motion everything else that follows in the plot. Scene structure: The Beginning of the scene revolves around establishing Mark’s powerful desire to get into a final club. The Middle involves Erica calling into question Mark’s obsession while Mark challenges her to support him, and in so doing provides one dismissive comment toward her after another. The Ending centers on Erica breaking up with Mark. Point of the scene: It’s the break-up and specifically Erica’s final lines to Mark as she leaves: Here is the scene from the movie: The point of the scene is two-fold: (1) Erica breaks up with Mark. (2) Erica’s parting shot becomes a verbal talisman to inspire Mark to make something of himself and join a final club. The scene’s ending dialogue caps off this key purpose of the scene tied to the plot. Mark Walker, one of the writers in the class, responded with this: I think that is a key observation that those new to screenwriting (like myself) need to get into their heads. I think, when I started out, I was probably of the mind that dialogue wasn’t as important as the scene description and visual “delivery” of the film. As I have wised up a bit (there is still a lot of room for further improvement) from reading books and blogs, and the SMC (Screenwriting Master Class), it has become clearer just how powerful good dialogue can be, let alone great dialogue. it is interesting to watch films knowing this and think about how the dialogue works so well. Scott’s example clearly shows this, and how it is an art to make it look like conversation when it actually isn’t. To throw all that stuff at you that you probably don’t recognize as character building and exposition until later in the movie when you get those call-backs that relate to some of that conversation and it all clicks into place, is a vital skill. I would compare this to Tarantino introducing Jules and Vincent as they approach the building where the guys with Marcellus’ brief case are waiting. An excerpt: Here’s the scene from the movie: I think we get all four of Scott’s purposes in that conversation which, on the surface of it, sounds like two guys just chewing the fat about work and shit. But we hear about (amongst everything else): Vincent being in Amsterdam — he has been away and missed some stuff We get banter about their weapons which tells us they are gangsters/hitmen….dangerous Jules is catching him up about the guy that gave Mia foot massage This tells us their boss is a hard man not to be messed with We hear Vincent has been asked to “take her out” while Marcellus is away — setting up the next part of the story. Jules concern in relation to foot massages tells us more about their boss and theor perception of him. The dialogue tells us about the suitcase Macguffin. We get to learn that Vincent and Jules are very different — Jules is respectful and more refined than Vincent who is a little more brash — all found from a conversation about giving foot massages We get everything; exposition, inner life of the characters, we learn how they are different from each other and plot moves forward with regards the macguffin. By the time we are ready to kick the door down we know exactly who these two guys are, what they do for a living and who they work for, as well as a bit about their past and what is in store for them (or at least Vincent) in the next chapter. None of the dialogue is “wasted” or “filler” — like everything else with screenwriting — if it doesn’t serve the story, does it need to be cut? That example you cite from  Pulp Fiction  works as entertainment straight-out, thus if we don’t look closer, we may assume it’s just QT riffing with dialogue, pure and simple. But if we  do  examine the content, we see, as you pointed out so well with your analysis, Mark, that there is a purpose to the conversation; in fact,  several  of them, in effect setting up a few important subplots. A comparison of this scene and the opening to  The Social Network  reveals that everything hangs on the dialogue’s tie-in to and advancement of the plot. In fact, if one were to boil down each scene to the single most important contribution each makes to the plot, it’s right there: Pulp Fiction : To establish the upcoming “date” Vincent is going to have with Mia and the pressure he will be under to handle that properly re Marcellus and his temper. That sets everything in that subplot into motion including Vincent scoring the heroin as a way of taking the edge of the date which leads to Mia overdosing on it (thinking it’s cocaine), and so forth. The Social Network : The breakup of Mark and Erica which, as the denouement shows [even though the entirety of their subplot is only four or five beats], provides one huge motivation on Mark’s part to succeed: To prove he has worth in response to her rejection of him. Takeaway: Dialogue = Purpose. This is true even if you go off on a riff à la Tarantino and Sorkin. Tie the dialogue to those four markers, but most especially to the advancement of the plot. I don’t care how good you are with dialogue, if you write a scene in which the dialogue has zero impact on the plot, you should consider reshaping the scene to make it relevant to the plot or drop the scene entirely as being extraneous. What are your thoughts about how important dialogue is to plot? Comment Archive -- -- 1 More from Go Into The Story Follow Official Screenwriting Blog of The Black List Read more from    Go Into The Story Recommended from Medium Robert Ralph in New Writers Welcome How to add a signature file Ilana Quinn in Writers’ Blokke How to Research for Historical Fiction Sakshi Udavant (Luna) in The Brave Writer A Client Just Rejected My Work And I Have Never Been Happier Ellie Jacobson Get Your Write On: Setting Yourself Up for NaNoWriMo Success Sherry McGuinn in Rogues’ Gallery Men, Got a Problem With the Ladies? Jessica A in The Book Mechanic 4 Personal Qualities All Successful Writers Share Rosa de Saron C. in Publishing Well Is Writing Long Form Really Worth It Scott A. Gese in Success in Mind Medium: Are You Sure You Want to Take This Ride? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Scott Myers 35K Followers Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Get the app Try for free Listen. Learn. Level up. Learn today’s most in-demand skills with actionable, podcast-style lessons from top experts. Join 40,000+ founders, professionals, creators, and ambitious know-it-alls getting smarter on the go. Try for free Featured by: Popular courses More popular courses Nutrition Plant-Based Performance Chris Paul, NBA All-Star Chris Paul teaches lessons on plant-based eating and explains how transforming his diet transformed his game. He's joined by a team of chefs and academics to explore the possibilities of simple, healthful plant-based nutrition and inspire elite and armchair athletes alike to change their minds about green eating. View course Startups Launch a Startup Alexis Ohanian, Reddit co-founder Starting a company is hard in the best of times. Starting one today might seem downright impossible. It's not. Era-defining businesses like Instagram, Slack, and Uber were all born into down economies. And even as the world turns upside-down, new opportunities are emerging for smart entrepreneurs. In this course, Reddit’s Alexis Ohanian, Everlane’s Michael Preysman, and a team of Silicon Valley experts teach you how to responsibly prepare for the possibilities and challenges of building your own company. They’ll walk you through the steps of launching a high-growth startup and provide you with winning strategies for drafting your business plan, securing funding, developing your product, and much more. View course Leadership How to Dream, Lead, and Achieve Scott Kelly, NASA astronaut “If you can dream it, you can do it.” As an engineer, naval aviator, record-setting astronaut, and commander of the International Space Station, Scott Kelly has lived his life by these words. In this candid and entertaining course, Scott shares instructive stories from his childhood in New Jersey, his days as a US Navy test pilot, and his year hurtling around the globe at 17,500 MPH and teaches hard-earned lessons on perseverance, mental fortitude, mission-readiness, and personal motivation drawn from his experiences in the most competitive, extreme environments imaginable. View course Wellness The Pursuit of Happier Kristen Meinzer, writer The self-help industry is worth over a billion dollars, but advice from celebrities and stars doesn’t always stick. And now, more than ever, happiness feels very out of reach. So, in this course, we turn to academics, researchers, and scientists who give it to us straight — how can we be happy? Host and self-help skeptic Kristen Meinzer leads the search for what actually makes us a little stronger, a little more fulfilled, and a little happier. View course Leadership Your Network Is Your Net Worth Chris Lyons of Andreessen Horowitz As a Managing Partner at Andreessen Horowitz, Chris Lyons’s job relies on the strength of his network and his ability to leverage it to create new opportunities for his company and the founders he works with every day. Early in Chris’s career, one of his mentors, Silicon Valley pioneer Ken Coleman, shared a piece of advice he’ll never forget: “Your network is your net worth.” In other words: business is all about relationships. Being great at your job only gets you halfway there. Your network — and by extension your reputation — gets you the rest of the way. In this course, Chris shares what he’s learned over the years to help you build a more powerful, impactful network that can help accelerate your career. View course Confidence Speak with Confidence Celeste Headlee, TED speaker and author Whether you're nervous speaking publicly, anxious in social settings, or just want to get ahead at work, learning the techniques of effective communication will change the way you approach every interaction. Join master communicators, speechwriters, and vocal coaches as they teach you how to speak in any setting, from presenting to clients, to giving a wedding toast, to schmoozing at dinner parties. View course Cooking How to Eat Now Mark Bittman, bestselling food writer and former NYT columnist Designed for busy people, this course is celebrated food writer Mark Bittman’s guide to being an eater in the modern world. Bittman reveals his vision for the future of food and shares his best advice—and plenty of new insights—for cooking and eating healthfully and sustainably. You’ll also hear from chef Holly Haines about dining with company. After just four hours, you’ll be equipped to eat better, cook more often, and savor the good life in a truly sustainable way. View course Power tip People like to follow people way more than they like to follow brands. Elon Musk has 43M followers on Twitter, Tesla has 7M. ~ Nick Martell from  Branding for Founders Smarties around the world love Knowable Ready to jump in? Get the free app ©   2022    Knowable • Home Log in Subscribe Help & FAQ Terms Privacy Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write 108K Followers Follow Home About Creators Hub Scott Lamb · Sep 21 Updates on Medium’s distribution system Clarity on how distribution works, and a change to notifications —  One of our most important jobs here at Medium is to connect readers with valuable stories. We’re always updating and improving our system to do that crucial job better. Today, we’re taking a minute to clarify how distribution on Medium works. Until recently, our distribution system was binary, where some… Medium 2 min read Alex Benzer · Sep 9 Android Audio and Homepage Topics New updates to help you get more value from your reading time —  Your time matters. That’s why our team is committed to helping you get the most out of the time you spend reading on Medium. This means helping you find stories that are relevant to your interests and goals; knowledge that goes beyond entertainment to positively impact your life. … Medium 3 min read Medium Staff · Aug 29 It Happened on Medium: The First 10 Years A somewhat complete history of our first decade, and the stories that got us talking, thinking, and sharing —  Medium turned 10 this month. A decade ago, we built a place on the internet for stories that aren’t too long or too short, but… that in-between length. Our simple, beautiful publishing tools gave you the freedom to focus on your words, and our platform connected you with other readers… Medium 13 min read Breana Jones · Aug 24 Custom Domains, Mobile Editor, and a True Following Feed Working towards an innovative product you can rely on —  A big part of our work at Medium centers around earning and building trust with you, our readers, and creators. We want to be clear where we can and we want to build in public with you. In that vein, we have a couple of announcements to share. Custom Domains are back for good We first… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Breana Jones · Aug 5 Make Medium Yours It’s now easier to own your experience —  Hola readers and creators, I’m back to share more updates! I mentioned in my last 3MR that we value listening to you, and we make changes based on your feedback. One thing we’ve heard is that you aren’t always satisfied with the recommendations you see on your homepage. That’s something… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Alex Benzer · Aug 3 Introducing Tipping on Medium (beta) Add a customizable tipping button to your stories and start receiving direct support from your readers. —  “How can we make writing more sustainable and rewarding?” That question has always been top of mind for our team here at Medium. … Medium 2 min read Breana Jones · Aug 2 Listening shows up in the details A few changes that wouldn’t normally deserve their own blog post. —  Recently we’ve started being more clear about how much we value listening to our community. Or as our new CEO Tony Stubblebine says, : “Help mold the future of Medium by telling us what is important to you.” I’m one of the people who wants to hear from you. … 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Sandee Roston · Jul 12 Medium names technology and digital media veteran Tony Stubblebine CEO; founder Ev Williams transitions to Chairman of the Board Medium announced today that Tony Stubblebine will become Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors, effective July 20, 2022. Medium founder and Chief Executive Officer Ev Williams will transition to the newly-created role of chairman of the board. Ev Williams founded Medium in 2012, and has… Medium 2 min read Tony Stubblebine · Jul 12 Hello Medium readers, authors, editors and publishers I’m the new CEO. —  There are so many different reasons to read Medium and so many different reasons to publish on Medium. We are a very large community consisting of hundreds of millions of readers and many thousands of authors. That is our strength. I know this because I’ve been deeply involved with Medium… 3 min read Alex Benzer · May 16 Listen to stories anytime, anywhere. Audio is now on iOS. Today, following the success of audio on the Medium website, we’re rolling out the feature to our iOS app. Making it easy to soak up new ideas is the heart of Medium’s mission — and now that’s more convenient than ever. … Medium 3 min read Get started The official Medium blog Follow Connect with    3 min read Editors Medium Staff News and updates from the staff at Medium. Follow Alex Benzer Director of Product @ Medium Follow Warren Shaeffer vp @medium, co-founder @knowablefyi, 3x co-founder (human + biz), very lucky, medium funny. wip. Follow See all Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Who can read the work I publish on Medium? A blank page is also a door. At Medium you can walk through it. It's easy and free to share your thinking on any topic, connect with an audience, express yourself with a range of publishing tools, and even earn money for your work. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in ITNEXT Glauber Costa Follow Oct 4 · 6 min read Save SQLite: QEMU all over again? In a trip down memory lane, I recall my experience with QEMU, and how the project changed completely to accommodate a new industry trend. Is SQLite history rhyming all over again? I first heard of QEMU in the early 2000s. QEMU was the brainchild of  Fabrice Bellard . Fabrice is, without any exaggeration, a true genius. Don’t believe me? Those are just some of his achievements from his Wikipedia page: Came up with the formula  for calculating the nth digit of pi in base 16. Computed pi to 2.7 trillion digits with a desktop computer for the first time, in 2009. Created  FFmpeg , one of the most widely used video encoders. Created  QEMU , a fast full-system emulator translating between pretty much every processor architecture. How emulators worked before QEMU I first heard of QEMU around 2006. I was into computer architecture from my early days, and most emulators at the time would simply naively translate instructions from into the emulated architecture at runtime. QEMU, on the other hand, employed a “Tiny Code Generator” to translate instructions through JIT compilation. It wasn’t as fast as running natively, but for a variety of applications it was  fast enough  and for many use cases it felt like pure miracle. QEMU also had its own emulation for common physical devices you would expect to find, its own  disk image format , and much more. Virtualization shifts the industry But around that time, something else was brewing. Virtualization was becoming mainstream in the industry. The idea of virtualization is different from emulation. If you are just trying to run an isolated workload, and not something for a different architecture altogether, you can just execute the instructions natively. This is easier said than done, because processors have privileged instructions that would allow you to access other virtual machines. But the approach pioneered by the Xen project in 2004, called paravirtualization, suggested that if you are okay with changing the Operating System — since user programs can’t call into privileged instructions anyway — then you can safely run many virtual machines together to get the job done. Later, both Intel and AMD released their own process extensions that would provide a shadow view of the processor’s privileged state and allow solutions like KVM, which later came to power AWS’s Nitro to rise. Getting QEMU to do Virtualization Both of those solutions solved the problem of how to execute VM instructions. But a full solution also requires the VMs to have isolated views of  devices,  like sound cards, graphic cards, disks, etc. QEMU had all that, and was pretty awesome, and everybody wanted to reuse it. But QEMU was a solution for emulation, not virtualization. QEMU was an open source project, but the community was not very interested in the whole virtualization thing. As a matter of fact, being mostly maintained by volunteers, the community didn’t seem very interested in a lot except for a very narrow set of personal interests. And hey, no judgment here: I too have maintained things as an unpaid volunteer, and I know how hard it is! But be it as it may, we now had this amazing solution that did  almost  everything we needed, a lot of other communities building things around it, trying their best to keep things unchanged for ease of upgrade reasons. Until the inevitable happened: we forked QEMU through the  qemu-kvm  project. No contributions led to fragmentation In a sense, because everybody was taking bits and pieces of QEMU to build their device models, QEMU  was already forked.  That work laid the foundation that enabled QEMU itself (albeit a fork of it), to be extended for the purpose of virtualization by replacing the processor emulation with a native one. This repository became a common one for all parties interested in pushing the envelope of what QEMU could do, and over time, that essentially became the  new  QEMU: it could still do Emulation as well as before — or better, since many of the improvements were very generic, but now could also do virtualization, opening up a completely new applications for the project. Is SQLite at a similar fork in the road? When I look around today, I see a very similar situation developing around SQLite. SQLite is the brainchild of  D. Richard Hipp , who was also involved with the  Tcl  programming language, and his  own version control system , among others. Same as Fabrice, an undoubtedly smart and achieved individual. The code for SQLite is also available, but contributing is even harder than it was at the QEMU days: SQLite is explicitly and unequivocally “ Open Source, not Open Contribution ”. The few core developers they have do not work with modern tools like git and collaboration tools like Github, and don’t accept contributions, although they may or may not accept your suggestion for a new feature request. Much like QEMU, new trends in the industry are taking it into a completely new direction: the rise of use cases around Edge compute, due to its limited resources and limited environments means that SQLite fits the bill perfectly. However, edge computing also means that your code will be running in many geographical locations, as close as possible to the user for the better possible latency. Which means that the data that hits a single SQLite instance now needs to be replicated to all the others. Parallels between the rise of Virtualization and the rise of the Edge. Many solutions to the problem of how to run SQLite, but with distributed data emerged. A few notable of them are: rqlite : a full blown distributed database similar to CockroachDB, but using SQLite as a storage engine. You talk to it over the wire, and it is no longer an embeddable database. BedrockdB : similar to rqlite, also built around SQLite. dqlite : a combination of SQLite & RAFT, written in C, that keeps the embeddable aspect of SQLite. But because you have to be explicit about the networking events, ORMs like sqlx won’t work and/or have to be adapted. ChiselStore : My own attempt at the problem. Close to dqlite (but in Rust), and ultimately, as I found out, suffers from many of the same problems. LiteFS : as its biggest advantage, it is the fact that it sits  behind  SQLite, so everything that works with SQLite, works with LiteFS. Something’s gotta give, and under the current limitations of not changing SQLite, their approach is to essentially provide a distributed FUSE filesystem that spreads the writes and deals with the consensus problems. It comes with its own set of issues, many of them raised in this  HackerNews thread . I personally think that if distributed filesystems were easy, we’d have a good one by now. But under the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed, it is the best approach by far. Kudos to Ben and the team! What if SQLite accepted contributions? Why the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed? Sure, nobody wants to keep patched software around, and nobody wants to require users to install alternative versions of core software like SQLite. This is a classic  prisoner’s dilemma  situation: if one of us carries a fork of SQLite, that’s a losing proposition in the long term. As the story of QEMU — and frankly many others — teaches us, if we manage to convene together, we all win. That is why today I am starting, together with some of my peers,  libSQL . It is a place for all of us to come together and build a new generation of what SQLite as an embedded database should be. We want to build a strong and independent community, with a clear code of conduct, and if you ever felt like SQLite could change to accommodate the future, you’re more than welcome to come build with us. There are more details of what we want to achieve on our  manifesto . Here are some issues we’d like to tackle: We would like to use io_uring and asynchronous interfaces We would like to provide replication hooks for distributed systems We would like to allow for WASM-based user-defined functions What would you like to contribute? I’m all ears. You can reach out to us at: Github Discussions Discord -- -- 6 More from ITNEXT Follow ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. Read more from    ITNEXT Recommended from Medium Harshita Shivhare License to Freedom Learner CARES in Analytics Vidhya Part 3.2 !! Pandas DataFrame to PostgreSQL using Python Bromcom Switching MIS: So you’re thinking of switching Bruno Morel in B-Yond The Blog Ending the myth of the 10x, 100x, SuperStar programmer — quants Nekrasov Aleksandr Dates in java-based REST API’s Tom Jebbo (PycraftDev) How we are making a Video Game in Python #7 Juan in Analytics Vidhya Emmy Awards — Building my own R Shiny Framework David Khourshid CSS Animations with Finite State Machines About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Glauber Costa 518 Followers Founder and CEO of ChiselStrike. Join me!  https://github.com/chiselstrike/chiselstrike .  https://discord.com/invite/GHNN9CNAZe . Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started Cotten.IO Follow Following Latest That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right? Story time! Tim Cotten Oct 2 GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities Reactions to Dom Tait’s (Omdia) talk on current and future developments in Metaverse/VR technology, including reviews of games like… Tim Cotten Mar 21 Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s (to Found My Startup) Tim Cotten Jan 1 A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims The Fractal Team, led by Justin Kan — creator of Twitch — donated $150k out of their own pockets to victims of the infamous December 21st… Tim Cotten Dec 23, 2021 The $150k Discord Crypto Hack The $150k Discord Crypto Hack How 370 Crypto Fans Lost it All in 10 Minutes Tim Cotten Dec 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: Property Problems PHP Bugs: Property Problems You screwed up. You know what you did was wrong. How are you gonna make things right? PHP forgives but never forgets undefined properties. Tim Cotten May 5, 2021 PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets Undefined offset errors are the integer-based cousins to the string-based Undefined indexes errors, and like a bad penny they always seem… Tim Cotten Apr 28, 2021 PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects If you see this error, you’ve either made a terrible assumption about your incoming data, or misunderstood the data  you’re working with. Tim Cotten Apr 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes Do you believe in ghosts? How about the kind that mangle your user’s input in the name of security while still failing to secure anything? Tim Cotten Apr 14, 2021 PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types Undefined indexes, just like undefined variables and undefined properties, are the silent killers stalking your users. Tim Cotten Apr 7, 2021 PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP is so permissive about undefined variables that they don’t show up as Errors or Warnings, but as Notices. But they’re still important. Tim Cotten Mar 31, 2021 Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Following the Digital Trail of the CryptoForHealth Scammers Tim Cotten Jul 31, 2020 Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Identifying Click Fraud and Broken UTM Strings in Apache Logs Tim Cotten Mar 27, 2020 One Lambda to Rule Them All One Lambda to Rule Them All A Python Adventure in AWS (Feat. API Gateway) Tim Cotten Mar 20, 2020 How to Eat Gas in Ethereum How to Eat Gas in Ethereum Consuming 99.9% of the Gas Limit in an Ethereum Transaction Tim Cotten Feb 13, 2020 Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Implementing a Simple Agent in Kaggle’s New Simulations Competition Tim Cotten Jan 5, 2020 “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit An Attention Grabbing Marketing Stunt By blockd Tim Cotten Jan 3, 2020 Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? A Survey of Test Queries from Lotfi Zadeh’s 2006 Work Tim Cotten Jan 2, 2020 Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier EIP 2387/EIP 2384 and the Delay of Ethereum’s Difficulty Bomb Tim Cotten Jan 1, 2020 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Configuration and Installation of a Cloud-hosted Libra Testnet Node Tim Cotten Jun 24, 2019 About Cotten.IO Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started The Official Screenwriting Blog of the Black List Named "Best of the Best" Scriptwriting Website by Writer's Digest Archives Reader Questions Black List Contact Screenwriting Master Class Follow Following Scott's Teaching Create a Compelling Protagonist Create a Compelling Protagonist Workshop and develop your story’s Protagonist in my one-week online class which begins Monday, October 10th. Scott Myers Sep 28 “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” My book is now available both as a paperback and eBook. Scott Myers Apr 4 Today's Posts Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” A series featuring reflections on filmmaking by one of the truly great movie directors. Scott Myers Oct 9 The Trouble with “Character Flaw” The Trouble with “Character Flaw” “Characters, at least good ones, are multilayered individuals.” Scott Myers Oct 9 Great Scene: “Halloween” Great Scene: “Halloween” This is one of the iconic scenes in the history of horror movies: Laurie (Jamie Lee Curtis) versus Michael Myers (Tony Moran) in the Final… Scott Myers Oct 9 Video: “Magic Flight” Video: “Magic Flight” Another in the excellent screenwriting series Raising the Stakes. Scott Myers Oct 9 Page One: “Spy” (2015) Page One: “Spy” (2015) Written by Paul Feig Scott Myers Oct 9 Featured Articles Private Script Workshops Private Script Workshops On a limited basis, I work one-on-one with writers on their script project. Scott Myers Jan 22, 2018 About Screenwriting Master Class About Screenwriting Master Class Premier online learning resource with Tom Benedek and Scott Myers. Scott Myers Nov 12, 2016 My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters Over the years, I’ve interviewed dozens of writers whose scripts appeared on the annual Black List. Their collective insight into the craft… Scott Myers Apr 17, 2018 Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Named to the 20th Annual Writer’s Digest 101 Best Websites for Writers list. Scott Myers Apr 16, 2018 100+ Archive Links 100+ Archive Links In 14 years of hosting Go Into The Story, the site has accumulated 30,000+ posts covering just about every subject related to… Scott Myers Nov 10, 2016 100 Scene-Writing Prompts 100 Scene-Writing Prompts At a fundamental level, screenwriting is scene-writing. Use these prompts to improve your scene-writing chops. Scott Myers Nov 11, 2017 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting Professional screenwriters reflect on the craft. Scott Myers Aug 15, 2017 100s of Writer Interviews 100s of Writer Interviews You can learn a lot from professional writers talking about their craft. Scott Myers Nov 27, 2017 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks Nearly 1,000 pages on the craft and business of screenwriting. Scott Myers Aug 29, 2021 Script Download Links Script Download Links 100+ scripts made available by studios and production companies. Scott Myers Feb 8, 2017 About Go Into The Story Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy Become a member to see every story on Medium, support the writers who publish their best work here, and get access to all our tools to create and promote your own ideas. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. For every post of congratulations to the Figma team for having their years of hard work pay off, there were a dozen more lamenting what Adobe will do to their favorite… Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Anyone can write on Medium. Whether youâve never written before or are ready to create a full publication, itâs easy to  get started  and we allow you to focus more on big ideas and less on driving clicks. With the option to earn for your work, you can also be directly rewarded for the value you provide readers. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Pavan Kashyap Google's Achilles' Heel: Enabling Conversations Seoananthinfo SAP Helps Customers Map Their Road to the Intelligent Enterprise Rinku Prakash in iSchedul Impact of No Shows on Businesses and Economy & the Role of Technology on Mitigation Axial in Axial Axial S-1 Club — 908 Devices ْ Kerry Logistics picks up 50% in Indev Logistics for Rs.500-Cr Christine Russo Got 15 Minutes? Ethiopia COVID-19 Response Team in Africa COVID-19 Response Toolkit: The Blog 5 key steps in mobilizing COVID-19 response efforts in Africa Fintech Decoded in Fintech M&A Open Banking is rewiring the payments infrastructure About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 465 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Readers who follow you will see your latest writing in their feeds, keeping them up-to-date and engaged with your work. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Cotten.IO Tim Cotten Follow Oct 3 · 13 min read Save That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right?  Story time! In the spirit of #gamedev and inspired by the classic  UO postmortem video by Raph Koster, et al , I thought it’d be fun to share a few stories from the middle years of Ultima Online between my time at EA Redwood Shores and Mythic Fairfax. Today’s tale:  a technical teardown of burning down cheaters’ houses after finding a “criminal” ring of illegal item dupers. A Cheater’s House Burnt to the Ground in Luna, Ultima Online  (2008) Duping: UO’s Zero-Day Exploit When Ultima Online first launched we, the players, found some bugs. By some, I mean,  a lot . And the most valuable, diabolical, worth-building-a-secret-web-forum-to-trade-them sort of bug was:  duping . Being able to duplicate an item, or better,  a bag full of items , was the most advantageous exploit possible in the game. Better than speed-hacking, better than direct damage passthrough — even better than pre-lockdown home invasions. Snidely Whiplash: Notorious UO Gold Duper Some of the beta testers had a secret. Not all of us, of course, but there were certain seedy elements of the beta testing crowd that, rather than follow the virtue of Honesty, chose to hoard their knowledge of exploits rather than report them to the development team. Once UO’s beta ended and the game launched, well, suddenly the economy was hit by a wave of item duping. What was this “carefully guarded” exploit? Abusing areaserv boundaries. Rubberbanding For Fun and Profit I still remember the first time I saw it for myself. It was 1997 and I was running around north of the orc encampment near the town of Cove when I saw some randos doing the weirdest thing ever: they were running back and forth over this annoyingly laggy patch of the game map while dropping little chests on the ground. Now, I knew this particular area as being… the  worst . You see, there was this truly annoying part of the map on that dirt path between the mountains and the orc fortress that was pretty unresponsive and jerky when you walked over it. In fact, if you  *ran*  across it you might get “rubberbanded” — finding yourself losing a few seconds of gameplay time as you bounced back to a previous position before the server “caught up.” (Remind me to tell you all about UO’s server/client interpolation and tick-rate someday!) This was especially bad if a monster, like an inconveniently placed Orc Captain directly south of you, was chasing you and whacked you to death during your pathetically laggy attempt to flee. Imagine my surprise when these two players started excitedly yelling to each other in text (which floated over their heads) that “it worked! omgz!” Yup, they had managed to, as they excitedly bragged, figure out a trick to drop a chest on one side of the “laggy patch” while trying to pick-it-up/hand-it-over to the other player as they were both crossing from one side to the other and now each of them had a copy of the same chest: and its contents. Dupers! Guards! Guards! Seamless Server Boundaries are Hard What I had seen was an exploit based on the “areaserv” boundaries that split up the playable gameworld of Ultima Online. UO never did anything the easy way; after all, its first generation of designers were trying things — inventing entirely new things — that later online games would simply shake their heads at and say “nah, that’s too hard.” For instance: how to load-balance thousands of players in a huge 29,360,128 meter² game map in 1997? Instead of having different “zones” with loading screens or “long, foggy mountain passes”, the UO developers just invented rectangular, seamless “sub-maps” with a (fairly!) invisible method that just let you walk from one side to the other, all while things on the other side were still visible and updating in real-time. UO’s Trammel Areaserv Boundary Definitions  (2012) Thus, each game server (or “shard”) you played on was actually divided into “areaservs” and there was some incredibly well-written “mirror” code that handled communicating gamestate, object conditions, and events from one side of the border to the other. But crossing those borders as a player, sometimes, was noticeably laggy. Aside:  If you look at the areaserv map above you may notice that Britannia should’ve been divided up a bit more carefully so that areaserv boundaries didn’t cut through important/populated gameplay areas… look at poor Buccaneer’s Den:  there’s a reason those hidden, underground tunnels were never fun to PvP in . The areaservs were essentially copying your player character and sending over a bundled message between themselves containing all your info. Once a player crossed the boundary it destroyed the old copy of the player on the initial side. And it wasn’t just players: autonomous mobile objects (mobs) like monsters, animals, and NPCs could cross them as well. (Note: for future exploits those monsters and animals  also  had their own backpacks/inventories players could piggyback exploit attempts on; lots of llama drama.) Naturally, any given bug with the areaserv code represented the greatest probable source of “duping” exploits, especially when coupled with purposefully manipulations of a player’s gamestate before the server backup/shutdown sequence each morning. We Felt Like We Were Playing Whack-a-Mole And after I joined the UO team I learned a few things: The areaserv code is brilliant. It’s been patched and rewritten many times, but by my later years it had gotten pretty “smart” about the way it anticipated player state and pre-serialized objects before boundary transfers even happened. Yet, no matter how good the code became, we developers had introduced so much complexity into the game that sources of dupes abounded regardless — and more often than not they weren’t just areaserv issues anymore. It didn’t help that the game designers could actually write production-level code in Wombat (our own event-based scripting language) that had tons of wrappers for the C++ object management code. It really felt like we were constantly on the backfoot; we couldn’t be very proactive about dupes and depended on player reports & customer service to identify egregious exploits. Then, one day I had this weird idea. UO Didn’t Have a Database There are a couple of things you have to know about UO as it was in the mid-2000’s. Each shard ran a shutdown/backup sequence at a certain time in the early morning hours. (Great for not having to fix memory leaks!) The complete gamestate of each areaserv was dumped from memory into a big binary backup file — by the time I had joined the team they were approaching about 4gb in size. Once the areaservs finished the backups they shut down, restart, and went into standby while the “gameserv” did the same thing. You can think of the gameserv as a server dedicated to coordinating all of the areaservs and passing along logged in players to the right areaserv. The gameserv would shut down, restart, and then instruct each areaserv to load its last known-good backup. Each areaserv would load the binary backup and recreate the previously saved state of the game; it would  also  execute any triggers/hooks in the scripting code for objects/mobiles that said “Do X when the server loads.” [A bunch of other stuff here, including spawning new mobs or daily rares] The areaservs would report all was well and inform the gameserv, and the gameserv would re-announce itself to the login servers that it was available for play. #2 was the biggest problem with trying to find dupes: UO’s gamestate wasn’t in a “database” — there was no way to query for player possessions or objects to find illicit goods. It was 4gbs of binary blob; the data only made sense when loaded back into the game itself. I tried though: I *wanted* to read the binary blobs. I *wanted* to give Customer Service tools to find duped or stolen items. It just wasn’t possible with the tools of the time. Then I remembered #5, and it gave me an idea for a different line of attack. A Global Hash Registry Every dynamic object in UO— whether a mobile, player, or item — is capable of storing both data and scripts on themselves. Scripts don’t hold state once code execution ends, so we would store needed data in “objvars” and attach them to the same objects the scripts were attached to. The scripts themselves contained tons of “triggers” which were event handlers tied to game conditions. As I mentioned in #5 above, one of them had a name that went something like “beforeServerLoad” (heck if I remember the actual name) that specifically executed during the backup loading stage of the areaserv startup process. I thought: “What if we just *marked* the most valuable items in the game whenever they loaded from backup?” I went to the lead engineer,  Supreem , and asked for just one addition to the C++ code and an associated mapping to a “Wombat func” for it: a hashing function (hello crypto!). I wanted to make the gameserv store a running list of “marked” items during the areaserv loading process to identify dupes. A global hash registry. A Plan Unfolds: Invisible Dye Here’s how it worked: Every object in the game, when it loaded, had a hook for a generic “preload” script that would attach itself, execute, and detach itself before it allowed the object to execute any other scripts. This was really useful for cleaning up deployment errors if we did something wrong and it broke any objects in the game during a patch. I added a trigger in the preload script with an “beforeServerLoad” event that checked the item’s type: if it was in a predetermined list of the most expensive/rare types of items, it continued with the plan. If the item didn’t have a “tag” on it, it was created now: an objvar of “string” type that contained a hash of the current time, areaserv, and gameserv id (and some other unique data). This was a really long, random looking piece of text (larger than a 32bit integer) like “29bb546a415ff874e5129549fe8064249e8f1b2996fa2e7d52879d2ec24e06fd”. Once it had a tag (or if it already did), it sent a message to the gameserv (remember, there was only one of these per shard) and asked the gameserv to put it in a lookup registry. If the *tag* already existed in the registry then the item was permanently marked as “I AM DUPED” (again, with an objvar) in plaintext — because Customer Service reps in the god client could see it. The lookup registry only persisted until the areaservs all loaded up, then it cleared out to save memory. The idea was that if a valuable item (worthy of duping) had a unique hash stored on itself as an objvar, then the duping process — whatever it may be — would copy that same objvar’s value. Then there would be two unique objects both holding the same hash. The best time to check for this (in bulk) was during server loads, and that system marked all the objects with an “I AM DUPED” objvar. (Note: my memory may be fuzzy here, and we may have had to tie the script to the onPlayerLoad event as well; I just don’t remember if players were all loaded with the areaserv or whether they were fetched from the backup data on-demand). It was a lot like stamping the rare items with some sort of invisible ink that only fluoresced under certain conditions. So we released the updated code and let it run globally for a few weeks. And then the hunt began. Mwaha. Mwahaha. MWAHAHAHAHAHA! The Corporate Reaction Within a couple of weeks we realized the first phase had worked: we had found a ton of duped rare items, and they were mostly held by the same set of player accounts across multiple game servers. Despite our excitement, this is where we paused: what do we do now? We sat down to talk with Management, Customer Service, and our Community Manager. Management Our producer was stoked to explain what we’d accomplished to the studio general manager. I remember sitting in the meeting with a smile on my face, pleased as punch (as only an arrogant young gamedev can be), just to hear something I wasn’t expecting: “Mmm, I don’t think deleting them all [the duped items] is a good idea, you’ll hurt too many players.” I hadn’t considered that, actually. At all. I was too excited about having accomplished my long held goal to “catch some dupers.” I wanted to chafe and say something, maybe assert that he just  didn’t understand , but reined myself in and after the meeting I went back to the team and told them that we were forbidden from auto-deleting all the dupes. Customer Service So we went to the CS team for data. It was true. It would’ve been a terrible idea. The dupes spread so quickly once they were created that if we just deleted them all out from under all the players who had bought them (with their hard-earned gold) from the dupers we would be affecting a  significant  portion of the playerbase. Sure, some of them would be fine with the “morality” of our action — but on the scale of hundreds or thousands of affected players (per shard) we were just asking for the frustration to cause a wave of quiet quitting. I really shouldn’t have been surprised by this: our studio’s general manager has been running MMOs for a lot longer than I ever had. To make matters more complicated the Customer Service team started asking us hard questions, like: “Exactly how many duped  runic valorite hammers  should a person have before we ban them?” What online game developers open up with every patch. Wait, we were supposed to assign an arbitrary value on how many dupes being held by one person was suspicious? Oh. Oh boy. This was harder than code. It was community design, not just game design. Community Manager Thankfully, we had a level-headed community manager who was used to our over-exuberance. Honestly, they were just used to managing  me  whenever I got too passionate about something. “CS is going to ban them [the actual dupers] anyways. Why not make it an event?” was about how that conversation went. Well, I was the lead live events designer, so… we plotted. Fire! Heh Heh, Fire! We identified the dupers themselves and their storage depos: they had homes full of their duped items and NPC vendors selling them to the players. The “duping ring” stretched across multiple servers, comprised of distinct groups not necessarily working together. They had all evolved the same behaviors though: making tons of UO gold from selling dupes and then selling the UO gold on secondary markets for hard cash. So Adida and I wrote a script, that, once attached to a house, would: Delete the house and all of its contents. All of it. Instantly. Recursively. *poof* Spawn a bunch of immovable “housing rubble” in a predetermined rectangular area that fit the same dimensions the house existed in. It was colored dark black to look like it had soot all over it. Spawn a bunch of eternal “fire fields” amongst the rubble. Create a straw dummy labeled “An Effigy of a Traitor” to place in the middle of the burning rubble. Then, we chose a day, and struck. Customer Service mass banned the dupers on a timer, right before their associated server came online. Then we paused the gameserv/loginserv connection to those same servers and Adida and I ran around (teleported, really) to each housing location, attached the script, watched the fires erupt with joy, and moved on. We did this in batches of related servers so that each “duping ring” didn’t have time to notice they were banned and try to log in on alt-accounts to empty their houses before we could get to them The Community Reacts Confusion! Chaos! Joy! Laughter! Another House Successfully Burnt to the Ground — With Particle Effects Discussion threads popped up on Stratics and  MMORPG.com  almost instantly, full of wonderings and guesses — and a few false suggestions like that a CS employee had been caught up in the banning (false!). Well That’s Neat, But Don’t Do It Again Dozens of homes had been destroyed across the entire multiverse of Ultima Online, and the flames licking the sooty rubble were a visible testimony to our team’s determination to deal with cheaters. It felt fantastic! And we were told not to do it again. Lol. We took some flak for doing something so daringly public to cheating players — even though we made sure not to  identify  them to the other players directly — but still just barely skated by with upper-upper-upper management. Customer Service was instructed to use their discretion to deal with “I AM DUPED” items from then on, and honestly, by now I don’t know if anyone even remembers that the system exists (if it even does). Some Lessons Learned (Satoshi Surprise?) Readers who’ve been exposed to NFTs might notice the eerie resemblance of us marking these rare items (which were non-fungible!) with unique hashes to how blockchain-based Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) work today. Ironically, one thing that our method didn’t work on was *stacks* of objects (fungible items like gold coins). But  Satoshi Nakamoto solved that problem too! The first Bitcoin paper describes a perfect method (online or offline) for validating timestamped events like currency creation . It would’ve helped prevent dupes *and* ensured internal bad actors (with item creation powers) couldn’t just generate a bunch of gold to sell outside the game. Not that I’m saying MMOs need blockchains; but it turns out Proof-of-Work ledger technology had a use case here! (No wonder  Amazon now offers a similar service: QLDB ). Finally, one of the biggest things we learned was having to deal with the economics *after* the fire: especially when players wanted to compete for the now available, very  premium , housing spots. But that’s another story. About the Author Tim “Draconi” Cotten  was the lead game designer of Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss, and when he’s not writing up stories from the wild days of online gaming is working on applying all those hard-won lessons to Metaverse design. Follow him on Twitter  for more Ultima related stories! -- -- 4 More from Cotten.IO Follow Technology - established, emerging, disruptive, speculative Read more from    Cotten.IO Recommended from Medium Rowan Kaiser How To Play Mass Effect — Start With ME2 Sammie Aran Sammie’s Opinion — SSBU: Steve and Minecraft! Sleeping Donut in Donut Lab Donut Punks was released for iOS and got downloaded over 1 million times! THEWEB BAZAR HOW CAN MAKE A GAME DEVELOPER Reynolds Sandbox in The Reynolds Sandbox Media Tips: Drew Scanlon, Clothmapping the World Through Games Draconid in Dota Observatory MDL Chengdu Major Data Analysis Platunovnikita PlanetQuest is a unique exploration, survival and discovery game. Alice Mathew Top 5 Game Development Software About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Tim Cotten 691 Followers Founder of Scrypted Inc: Building interactive digital assets for the Metaverse. < tim@cotten.io > @cottenio Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Good ideas need spaces to take shape before they can take off. So we built Medium to make it easier for more people to read, write and explore ideas together. Thatâs why weâre an open platform 20,000 people use to share their expertise and experiences every day. Itâs also why weâre a publisher, creating the stories 150-million Medium readers are asking for. And why we work with well-known authors, magazines and newspapers to help more people find great thinking that expands their perspective. Tell your story your way â with different ways to write, style, and brand your work. If you join the  Medium Partner Program , you can earn money based on how much time members spend reading your work and whenever you convert non-paying readers into members. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Brett Johnson Open The Mic Newsletter — Podcast News Jbetancourt Fake News Major Writing Assignment Rani Yadav-Ranjan Fake news is not new! Ajit Pai The Need for Speed Aya Schechner CEO Snippets: David Walmsley, Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail Andrey Abasin Epoch Media Casts Wider Net to Spread Its Message Online Kathryn Fraser The Symbol of Survival: The Media Impact on Kalief Browder Ameera AlSaid in Doha News Will Qatar’s print media survive COVID-19? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 462 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 12 min read Medium Terms of Service Effective: September 1, 2020 You can see our previous Terms  here . Thanks for using Medium. Our mission is to deepen people’s understanding of the world and spread ideas that matter. These Terms of Service (“ Terms ”) apply to your access to and use of the websites, mobile applications and other online products and services (collectively, the “ Services ”) provided by A Medium Corporation (“ Medium ” or “ we ”).  By clicking your consent (e.g. “Continue,” “Sign-in,” or “Sign-up,”) or by using our Services, you agree to these Terms, including the mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver in the Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration Section. Our  Privacy Policy  explains how we collect and use your information while our  Rules  outline your responsibilities when using our Services. By using our Services, you’re agreeing to be bound by these Terms and our Rules. Please see our  Privacy Policy  for information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you. If you have any questions about these Terms or our Services, please contact us at  legal@medium.com . Your Account and Responsibilities You’re responsible for your use of the Services and any content you provide, including compliance with applicable laws. Content on the Services may be protected by others’ intellectual property rights. Please don’t copy, upload, download, or share content unless you have the right to do so. Your use of the Services must comply with our Rules. You may need to register for an account to access some or all of our Services. Help us keep your account protected. Safeguard your password to the account, and keep your account information current. We recommend that you do not share your password with others. If you’re accepting these Terms and using the Services on behalf of someone else (such as another person or entity), you represent that you’re authorized to do so, and in that case the words “you” or “your” in these Terms include that other person or entity. To use our Services, you must be at least 13 years old. If you use the Services to access, collect, or use personal information about other Medium users (“Personal Information”), you agree to do so in compliance with applicable laws. You further agree not to sell any Personal Information, where the term “sell” has the meaning given to it under applicable laws. For Personal Information you provide to us (e.g. as a Newsletter Editor), you represent and warrant that you have lawfully collected the Personal Information and that you or a third party has provided all required notices and collected all required consents before collecting the Personal Information. You further represent and warrant that Medium’s use of such Personal Information in accordance with the purposes for which you provided us the Personal Information will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) and will not cause us to violate any applicable laws. User Content on the Services Medium may review your conduct and content for compliance with these Terms and our Rules, and reserves the right to remove any violating content. Medium reserves the right to delete or disable content alleged to be infringing the intellectual property rights of others, and to terminate accounts of repeat infringers. We respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement if they comply with the law; please report such notices using our  Copyright Policy . Rights and Ownership You retain your rights to any content you submit, post or display on or through the Services.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, by submitting, posting, or displaying content on or through the Services, you grant Medium a nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your content in all media formats and distribution methods now known or later developed on the Services. Medium needs this license because you own your content and Medium therefore can’t display it across its various surfaces (i.e., mobile, web) without your permission. This type of license also is needed to distribute your content across our Services. For example, you post a story on Medium. It is reproduced as versions on both our website and app, and distributed to multiple places within Medium, such as the homepage or reading lists. A modification might be that we show a snippet of your work (and not the full post) in a preview, with attribution to you. A derivative work might be a list of top authors or quotes on Medium that uses portions of your content, again with full attribution. This license applies to our Services only, and does not grant us any permissions outside of our Services. So long as you comply with these Terms, Medium gives you a limited, personal, non-exclusive, and non-assignable license to access and use our Services. The Services are protected by copyright, trademark, and other US and foreign laws. These Terms don’t grant you any right, title or interest in the Services, other users’ content on the Services, or Medium trademarks, logos or other brand features. Separate and apart from the content you submit, post or display on our Services, we welcome feedback, including any comments, ideas and suggestions you have about our Services. We may use this feedback for any purpose, in our sole discretion, without any obligation to you. We may treat feedback as nonconfidential. We may stop providing the Services or any of its features within our sole discretion. We also retain the right to create limits on use and storage and may remove or limit content distribution on the Services. Termination You’re free to stop using our Services at any time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your access to the Services with or without notice. Transfer and Processing Data In order for us to provide our Services, you agree that we may process, transfer and store information about you in the US and other countries, where you may not have the same rights and protections as you do under local law. Indemnification To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you will indemnify, defend and hold harmless Medium, and our officers, directors, agents, partners and employees (individually and collectively, the  “Medium Parties” ) from and against any losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, expenses or costs ( “Claims” ) arising out of or related to your violation, misappropriation or infringement of any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) or your violation of the law. You agree to promptly notify Medium Parties of any third-party Claims, cooperate with Medium Parties in defending such Claims and pay all fees, costs and expenses associated with defending such Claims (including attorneys’ fees). You also agree that the Medium Parties will have control of the defense or settlement, at Medium’s sole option, of any third-party Claims. Disclaimers — Service is “As Is” Medium aims to give you great Services but there are some things we can’t guarantee. Your use of our Services is at your sole risk. You understand that our Services and any content posted or shared by users on the Services are provided “as is” and “as available” without warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title, and non-infringement. In addition, Medium doesn’t represent or warrant that our Services are accurate, complete, reliable, current or error-free. No advice or information obtained from Medium or through the Services will create any warranty or representation not expressly made in this paragraph. Medium may provide information about third-party products, services, activities or events, or we may allow third parties to make their content and information available on or through our Services (collectively, “ Third-Party Content ”). We do not control or endorse, and we make no representations or warranties regarding, any Third-Party Content. You access and use Third-Party Content at your own risk. Some locations don’t allow the disclaimers in this paragraph and so they might not apply to you. Limitation of Liability We don’t exclude or limit our liability to you where it would be illegal to do so; this includes any liability for the gross negligence, fraud or intentional misconduct of Medium or the other Medium Parties in providing the Services. In countries where the following types of exclusions aren’t allowed, we’re responsible to you only for losses and damages that are a reasonably foreseeable result of our failure to use reasonable care and skill or our breach of our contract with you. This paragraph doesn’t affect consumer rights that can’t be waived or limited by any contract or agreement. In countries where exclusions or limitations of liability are allowed, Medium and Medium Parties won’t be liable for: (a)   Any indirect, consequential, exemplary, incidental, punitive, or special damages, or any loss of use, data or profits, under any legal theory, even if Medium or the other Medium Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages. (b)   Other than for the types of liability we can’t limit by law (as described in this section), we limit the total liability of Medium and the other Medium Parties for any claim arising out of or relating to these Terms or our Services, regardless of the form of the action, to the greater of $50.00 USD or the amount paid by you to use our Services. Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration We want to address your concerns without needing a formal legal case. Before filing a claim against Medium, you agree to contact us and attempt to resolve the claim informally by sending a written notice of your claim by email at legal@medium.com or by certified mail addressed to A Medium Corporation, P.O. Box 602, San Francisco, CA 94104. The notice must (a) include your name, residence address, email address, and telephone number; (b) describe the nature and basis of the claim; and (c) set forth the specific relief sought. Our notice to you will be sent to the email address associated with your online account and will contain the information described above. If we can’t resolve matters within thirty (30) days after any notice is sent, either party may initiate a formal proceeding. Please read the following section carefully because it requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with Medium and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us, unless you opt out of arbitration by following the instructions set forth below. No class or representative actions or arbitrations are allowed under this arbitration provision. In addition, arbitration precludes you from suing in court or having a jury trial. (a)  No Representative Actions. You and Medium agree that any dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services is personal to you and Medium and that any dispute will be resolved solely through individual action, and will not be brought as a class arbitration, class action or any other type of representative proceeding. (b)  Arbitration of Disputes.  Except for small claims disputes in which you or Medium seeks to bring an individual action in small claims court located in the county where you reside or disputes in which you or Medium seeks injunctive or other equitable relief for the alleged infringement or misappropriation of intellectual property,  you and Medium waive your rights to a jury trial and to have any other dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services, including claims related to privacy and data security, (collectively, “ Disputes ”) resolved in court . All Disputes submitted to JAMS will be resolved through confidential, binding arbitration before one arbitrator. Arbitration proceedings will be held in San Francisco, California unless you’re a consumer, in which case you may elect to hold the arbitration in your county of residence. For purposes of this section a “ consumer ” means a person using the Services for personal, family or household purposes. You and Medium agree that Disputes will be held in accordance with the JAMS Streamlined Arbitration Rules and Procedures (“ JAMS Rules ”). The most recent version of the JAMS Rules are available on the  JAMS website  and are incorporated into these Terms by reference. You either acknowledge and agree that you have read and understand the JAMS Rules or waive your opportunity to read the JAMS Rules and waive any claim that the JAMS Rules are unfair or should not apply for any reason. (c) You and Medium agree that these Terms affect interstate commerce and that the enforceability of this section will be substantively and procedurally governed by the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1,  et seq . (the “ FAA ”), to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. As limited by the FAA, these Terms and the JAMS Rules, the arbitrator will have exclusive authority to make all procedural and substantive decisions regarding any Dispute and to grant any remedy that would otherwise be available in court, including the power to determine the question of arbitrability. The arbitrator may conduct only an individual arbitration and may not consolidate more than one individual’s claims, preside over any type of class or representative proceeding or preside over any proceeding involving more than one individual. (d) The arbitration will allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the Dispute. The arbitrator, Medium, and you will maintain the confidentiality of any arbitration proceedings, judgments and awards, including information gathered, prepared and presented for purposes of the arbitration or related to the Dispute(s) therein. The arbitrator will have the authority to make appropriate rulings to safeguard confidentiality, unless the law provides to the contrary. The duty of confidentiality doesn’t apply to the extent that disclosure is necessary to prepare for or conduct the arbitration hearing on the merits, in connection with a court application for a preliminary remedy, or in connection with a judicial challenge to an arbitration award or its enforcement, or to the extent that disclosure is otherwise required by law or judicial decision. (e) You and Medium agree that for any arbitration you initiate, you will pay the filing fee (up to a maximum of $250 if you are a consumer), and Medium will pay the remaining JAMS fees and costs. For any arbitration initiated by Medium, Medium will pay all JAMS fees and costs. You and Medium agree that the state or federal courts of the State of California and the United States sitting in San Francisco, California have exclusive jurisdiction over any appeals and the enforcement of an arbitration award. (f)  Any Dispute must be filed within one year after the relevant claim arose; otherwise, the Dispute is permanently barred, which means that you and Medium will not have the right to assert the claim. (g)  You have the right to opt out of binding arbitration within 30 days of the date you first accepted the terms of this section by sending an email of your request to  yourfriends@medium.com . In order to be effective, the opt-out notice must include your full name and address and clearly indicate your intent to opt out of binding arbitration. By opting out of binding arbitration, you are agreeing to resolve Disputes in accordance with the next section regarding “Governing Law and Venue.” (h) If any portion of this section is found to be unenforceable or unlawful for any reason, (1) the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall be severed from these Terms; (2) severance of the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall have no impact whatsoever on the remainder of this section or the parties’ ability to compel arbitration of any remaining claims on an individual basis pursuant to this section; and (3) to the extent that any claims must therefore proceed on a class, collective, consolidated, or representative basis, such claims must be litigated in a civil court of competent jurisdiction and not in arbitration, and the parties agree that litigation of those claims shall be stayed pending the outcome of any individual claims in arbitration. Further, if any part of this section is found to prohibit an individual claim seeking public injunctive relief, that provision will have no effect to the extent such relief is allowed to be sought out of arbitration, and the remainder of this section will be enforceable. Governing Law and Venue These Terms and any dispute that arises between you and Medium will be governed by California law except for its conflict of law principles. Any dispute between the parties that’s not subject to arbitration or can’t be heard in small claims court will be resolved in the state or federal courts of California and the United States, respectively, sitting in San Francisco, California. Some countries have laws that require agreements to be governed by the local laws of the consumer’s country. This paragraph doesn’t override those laws. Amendments We may make changes to these Terms from time to time. If we make changes, we’ll provide you with notice of them by sending an email to the email address associated with your account, offering an in-product notification, or updating the date at the top of these Terms. Unless we say otherwise in our notice, the amended Terms will be effective immediately, and your continued use of our Services after we provide such notice will confirm your acceptance of the changes. If you don’t agree to the amended Terms, you must stop using our Services. Severability If any provision or part of a provision of these Terms is unlawful, void or unenforceable, that provision or part of the provision is deemed severable from these Terms and does not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Miscellaneous Medium’s failure to exercise or enforce any right or provision of these Terms will not operate as a waiver of such right or provision. These Terms, and the terms and policies listed in the Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You Section, reflect the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior agreements, statements and understandings of the parties. The section titles in these Terms are for convenience only and have no legal or contractual effect. Use of the word “including” will be interpreted to mean “including without limitation.” Except as otherwise provided herein, these Terms are intended solely for the benefit of the parties and are not intended to confer third-party beneficiary rights upon any other person or entity. You agree that communications and transactions between us may be conducted electronically. Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You -  Medium Rules -  Partner Program Terms -  Membership Terms of Service -  Username Policy -  Custom Domains Terms of Service -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium SheHacksPurple in DevOps Dudes Security is Everybody’s Job — Part 1 — DevSecOps SkyNet Tools Vulnnr — Vulnerability Scanner & Auto Exploiter itSynergy 5 Cybersecurity Misconceptions That Need to Be Debunked phbits OpenSSL Root Certificate Authority Afolic Setting up Burpsuite for your web penetration testing Shashwat Singh Critical Controls to Secure OpenSSH Installation Auditchain AUDITCHAIN ANNOUNCES PHASE 2 BOUNTY CAMPAIGN! Cyrex Security Explained: Fear the Peer-to-Peer About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Anyone can write on Medium. Whether youâve never written before or are ready to create a full publication, itâs easy to get started and we allow you to focus more on big ideas and less on driving clicks. With the option to earn for your work, you can also be directly rewarded for the value you provide readers. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Work at Medium

sign - [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started SportsRaid Original reporting and curated sports data journalism. Actively looking for additional writers. NFL NBA MLB AFL 60th More Stories About Us Follow Latest Babe Ruth: The Life and Baseball Career of The Great Bambino Babe Ruth: The Life and Baseball Career of The Great Bambino A turbulent childhood and an iconic baseball legend Javad Luckey Oct 6 The Origin Story of Baseball & Baseball Cards The Origin Story of Baseball & Baseball Cards Baseball history is as old as America itself. And baseball cards are 175+ years old. Javad Luckey Oct 3 Nick Chubb Is Laying Claim To The “Best Running Back Alive” Title Nick Chubb Is Laying Claim To The “Best Running Back Alive” Title Through the first three games of the 2022 season, nobody has rushed for more yards, and been more productive doing so. Rajan Nanavati Sep 30 What Does One Have To Do To Be Definitively Ahead of Jordan All Time? What Does One Have To Do To Be Definitively Ahead of Jordan All Time? Michael Jordan and the G.O.A.T (greatest of all time) argument is unfair. Breaking The Glass Sep 28 Nick’s Picks — NFL Week 2 … Away Teams Reign Supreme Nick’s Picks — NFL Week 2 … Away Teams Reign Supreme While week one did not go as planned (a slight understatement — it was an all-out bloodbath), we move forward! It’s only right that my… Nick Atwood Sep 23 NBA  The Story of the First Chinese NBA Player: Wang Zhizhi The Story of the First Chinese NBA Player: Wang Zhizhi Before Yao Ming, there was Wang Zhizhi. This is his story. Javad Luckey Sep 21 Off-Season NBA Instagram Off-Season NBA Instagram Contract Campaigning & Fashion Nova Ads Skyler Nielsen-Sorensen Sep 6 NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Western Conference) NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Western Conference) Welcome to part two where I lay out my predictions for the upcoming NBA season, and analyze my picks, division by division. In my last… Edward Campanelli Sep 4 NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Eastern Conference) NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Eastern Conference) This is the first part of my two-part series where I lay out my standings predictions for the upcoming NBA season, and analyze my picks… Edward Campanelli Aug 23 Early Evaluations of Five Top 2023 Draft Prospects Early Evaluations of Five Top 2023 Draft Prospects It may be the dog days of the 2022 offseason, but fans and reporters are already looking ahead to the 2023 Draft. The incoming rookie class… Jordan Pagkalinawan Aug 9 Kevin Durant Still Loves Kyrie Irving Kevin Durant Still Loves Kyrie Irving Rejoice — Bromance is still alive! At least in Brooklyn where, moments ago, The Athletic broke the news that Kevin Durant gave Nets owner… Nick Atwood Aug 8 Bill Russell’s Quietly Defiant Life Bill Russell’s Quietly Defiant Life He outlived his rivals, teammates and the racism and hatred of the city where he played but did not represent. Kent Anderson Aug 1 Explaining the Fallout From This Morning’s Celtics/Nets News Explaining the Fallout From This Morning’s Celtics/Nets News Late last night, Adrian Wojnarowski announced that the Boston Celtics “have emerged among teams engaged in talks on a possible deal” for… Edward Campanelli Jul 25 About SportsRaid Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy If you have a story to tell, knowledge to share, or a perspective to offer â welcome home. Sign up for free so your writing can thrive in a network supported by millions of readers â not ads. Sign in [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started Cotten.IO Follow Following Latest That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right? Story time! Tim Cotten Oct 2 GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities Reactions to Dom Tait’s (Omdia) talk on current and future developments in Metaverse/VR technology, including reviews of games like… Tim Cotten Mar 21 Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s (to Found My Startup) Tim Cotten Jan 1 A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims The Fractal Team, led by Justin Kan — creator of Twitch — donated $150k out of their own pockets to victims of the infamous December 21st… Tim Cotten Dec 23, 2021 The $150k Discord Crypto Hack The $150k Discord Crypto Hack How 370 Crypto Fans Lost it All in 10 Minutes Tim Cotten Dec 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: Property Problems PHP Bugs: Property Problems You screwed up. You know what you did was wrong. How are you gonna make things right? PHP forgives but never forgets undefined properties. Tim Cotten May 5, 2021 PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets Undefined offset errors are the integer-based cousins to the string-based Undefined indexes errors, and like a bad penny they always seem… Tim Cotten Apr 28, 2021 PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects If you see this error, you’ve either made a terrible assumption about your incoming data, or misunderstood the data  you’re working with. Tim Cotten Apr 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes Do you believe in ghosts? How about the kind that mangle your user’s input in the name of security while still failing to secure anything? Tim Cotten Apr 14, 2021 PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types Undefined indexes, just like undefined variables and undefined properties, are the silent killers stalking your users. Tim Cotten Apr 7, 2021 PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP is so permissive about undefined variables that they don’t show up as Errors or Warnings, but as Notices. But they’re still important. Tim Cotten Mar 31, 2021 Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Following the Digital Trail of the CryptoForHealth Scammers Tim Cotten Jul 31, 2020 Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Identifying Click Fraud and Broken UTM Strings in Apache Logs Tim Cotten Mar 27, 2020 One Lambda to Rule Them All One Lambda to Rule Them All A Python Adventure in AWS (Feat. API Gateway) Tim Cotten Mar 20, 2020 How to Eat Gas in Ethereum How to Eat Gas in Ethereum Consuming 99.9% of the Gas Limit in an Ethereum Transaction Tim Cotten Feb 13, 2020 Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Implementing a Simple Agent in Kaggle’s New Simulations Competition Tim Cotten Jan 5, 2020 “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit An Attention Grabbing Marketing Stunt By blockd Tim Cotten Jan 3, 2020 Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? A Survey of Test Queries from Lotfi Zadeh’s 2006 Work Tim Cotten Jan 2, 2020 Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier EIP 2387/EIP 2384 and the Delay of Ethereum’s Difficulty Bomb Tim Cotten Jan 1, 2020 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Configuration and Installation of a Cloud-hosted Libra Testnet Node Tim Cotten Jun 24, 2019 About Cotten.IO Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started ITNEXT ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. About ITNEXT Write for ITNEXT Events & Videos SUMMIT Vacancies @ LINKIT Follow Following What Makes Julia Unique? What Makes Julia Unique? A look at how multiple dispatch distinguishes Julia from all other programming languages Erik Engheim Oct 8 Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode It is hard to submit spark jobs on kubernetes. As mentioned in the previous post of Hive on Spark in Kubernetes in which it is shown that… Kidong Lee Oct 8 Tutorial: Polymorphism in C Tutorial: Polymorphism in C This tutorial develops examples of polymorphism into a full program, showing why such techniques are useful and how to implement them. Christopher Bazley Oct 8 Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt made its debut back in late 2015. It is a free Certificate Authority provided by the Internet Security Research Group. The… Scotti Fletcher Oct 7 Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… One of the issues we all face in current times when developing software is the need and the will to monitor and keep applications in check… João Esperancinha Oct 7 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Elixir and Erlang are functional programming languages both running on BEAM virtual machine. Programs in both languages get compiled into… Mohammad Molla Oct 7 We are looking for an Azure Devops Automation Engineer Are you looking for a new challenge? Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy A web proxy is a perfect place to start collecting telemetry data without required engineering efforts. Nicolas Takashi Oct 6 Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Based on kubeadm or k3s, k0s, you choose… Luc Juggery Oct 6 How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose Tobias Wissmueller Oct 5 A Deep Dive of CVE-2022–33987 (Got allows a redirect to a UNIX socket) Every week, almost without fail, I come across one thing that confuses, entertains, or most commonly infuriates me. I’ve decided to keep a… Chaim Sanders Oct 5 What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? Zig lets you run code during compilation. What are the implications? Erik Engheim Oct 5 From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide I stumbled upon Angular 3 years ago when I started my first job as an Application Development Associate and I have to admit that I totally… Stavros Droutsas Oct 5 About ITNEXT Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started Level Up Coding Coding tutorials and news. The developer homepage gitconnected.com && skilled.dev && levelup.dev Write For Us 🎤 Interviews Day Trader Dashboard TOP CODING JOBS 🚀➡️ Follow Following 🔥 Hot Off the Press Type Challenges: Implement the RequiredByKeys<T, K> Utility Type Type Challenges: Implement the RequiredByKeys<T, K> Utility Type The Built-In Required Generic Are Not Flexible, the RequiredByKeys Generics Come to the Rescue. Bytefer Oct 6 CodePush: The Right Way CodePush: The Right Way This article is not about installing CodePush or how to use it. You can always refer the documentation at… Burak Erdem Oct 6 Building a multi-page app with Streamlit and restricting user access to pages using AWS Cognito Building a multi-page app with Streamlit and restricting user access to pages using AWS Cognito This article shows how to create a multi-page app for your data science projects using Streamlit while allowing log in functionality and… Mausam Gaurav Oct 6 Hire amazing developers from the Level Up community! Click Here to Learn More You Should Write Bad Code You Should Write Bad Code How to embrace absurdity and unlock more creative coding David Amos Oct 5 Getting Started With React-Bootstrap UI Library Getting Started With React-Bootstrap UI Library Learn how to install and use Bootstrap in your React projects —  the right way. Tara Prasad Routray Oct 5 10 Things You Should Know As A Data Scientist 10 Things You Should Know As A Data Scientist An overview of Data Scientist skills Mickaël Andrieu Oct 5 5 Platforms that will fuel your coding motivation! 5 Platforms that will fuel your coding motivation! A short list of the best platforms where you can practice programming while having fun. StackZero Oct 5 World’s Largest Bitcoin Loser Threw Away $161 Million — Here’s Why True Decentralisation May Not… World’s Largest Bitcoin Loser Threw Away $161 Million — Here’s Why True Decentralisation May Not… Between 2.3 and 3.7 million Bitcoin are lost to the Cryptocurrency gods forever. Jayden Levitt Oct 5 Ditch GraphQL When It Gets in the Way Ditch GraphQL When It Gets in the Way Are you or your team struggling with GraphQL concepts or does it feel too heavy for what you are building? Here are signs to watch out for. Andrew Courter Oct 5 React Context Pitfall: How to Avoid It React Context Pitfall: How to Avoid It Recently I was working on a piece of code and encountered an interesting problem. Fedor Selenskiy Oct 5 Why Docker is Awesome Why Docker is Awesome Want to run some software on your machine but don’t want to download every dependency? Docker has changed the way software is developed. Andrew Courter Oct 4 Design Patterns: Builder Pattern in TypeScript Design Patterns: Builder Pattern in TypeScript Master the Builder Pattern and Easily Handle the Creation of Objects. Bytefer Oct 4 Facebook Software Engineer Interview Handbook (2022) Facebook Software Engineer Interview Handbook (2022) Learn what it’s like to interview at Facebook in 2022 as a software engineer. Arslan Ahmad Oct 4 Python is Destroying the Planet Python is Destroying the Planet The most significant damage caused by Python Mohammed Ayar Oct 4 My Takeaways — Implementing a Strong Code-Review Culture My Takeaways — Implementing a Strong Code-Review Culture Code reviews are not about catching bugs. It’s about discussing a solution with your peer. Anas Anjaria Oct 4 Advanced Python: Decorators Advanced Python: Decorators This post will show how we can use python decorators effectively, and write one for your own requirements. Sandipan Dutta Oct 4 10 Apps For Your Homelab In 2022 10 Apps For Your Homelab In 2022 If you’re running a homelab, you may already be running lots of applications for your own personal cloud or to assist in running your… Aaron Berry Oct 4 10 Unexplored Ways to Use Python Loops 10 Unexplored Ways to Use Python Loops This will help you in competitive programming Pranjal Saxena Oct 4 About Level Up Coding Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started The Official Screenwriting Blog of the Black List Named "Best of the Best" Scriptwriting Website by Writer's Digest Archives Reader Questions Black List Contact Screenwriting Master Class Follow Following Scott's Teaching Create a Compelling Protagonist Create a Compelling Protagonist Workshop and develop your story’s Protagonist in my one-week online class which begins Monday, October 10th. Scott Myers Sep 28 “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” My book is now available both as a paperback and eBook. Scott Myers Apr 4 Today's Posts Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” A series featuring reflections on filmmaking by one of the truly great movie directors. Scott Myers Oct 9 The Trouble with “Character Flaw” The Trouble with “Character Flaw” “Characters, at least good ones, are multilayered individuals.” Scott Myers Oct 9 Great Scene: “Halloween” Great Scene: “Halloween” This is one of the iconic scenes in the history of horror movies: Laurie (Jamie Lee Curtis) versus Michael Myers (Tony Moran) in the Final… Scott Myers Oct 9 Video: “Magic Flight” Video: “Magic Flight” Another in the excellent screenwriting series Raising the Stakes. Scott Myers Oct 9 Page One: “Spy” (2015) Page One: “Spy” (2015) Written by Paul Feig Scott Myers Oct 9 Featured Articles Private Script Workshops Private Script Workshops On a limited basis, I work one-on-one with writers on their script project. Scott Myers Jan 22, 2018 About Screenwriting Master Class About Screenwriting Master Class Premier online learning resource with Tom Benedek and Scott Myers. Scott Myers Nov 12, 2016 My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters Over the years, I’ve interviewed dozens of writers whose scripts appeared on the annual Black List. Their collective insight into the craft… Scott Myers Apr 17, 2018 Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Named to the 20th Annual Writer’s Digest 101 Best Websites for Writers list. Scott Myers Apr 16, 2018 100+ Archive Links 100+ Archive Links In 14 years of hosting Go Into The Story, the site has accumulated 30,000+ posts covering just about every subject related to… Scott Myers Nov 10, 2016 100 Scene-Writing Prompts 100 Scene-Writing Prompts At a fundamental level, screenwriting is scene-writing. Use these prompts to improve your scene-writing chops. Scott Myers Nov 11, 2017 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting Professional screenwriters reflect on the craft. Scott Myers Aug 15, 2017 100s of Writer Interviews 100s of Writer Interviews You can learn a lot from professional writers talking about their craft. Scott Myers Nov 27, 2017 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks Nearly 1,000 pages on the craft and business of screenwriting. Scott Myers Aug 29, 2021 Script Download Links Script Download Links 100+ scripts made available by studios and production companies. Scott Myers Feb 8, 2017 About Go Into The Story Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy First off I love what Medium is doing here. From a consumer of interesting writing, this is exactly what I want; no ads and very often articles that are interesting to me. The articles surfaced are improving as I use the service which is a good sign that what these people are doing with my usage is working. The app on the other hand has some nagging issues for those who use an iPad in landscape or simply prefer landscape mode regardless of device. This app is clearly designed to be used in portrait mode... yes it works in landscape but the layout doesn't really fit the screen most of the time, and has huge white margins on both sides. It's as if the designers decided rather than reflow the text, we'll just keep the same text width and add huge margins on the sides. Large pictures that are embedded within articles tend to be cut off when in landscape, but are sized nicely to fit within the screen in portrait. Even worse, as of the last update the app shows a blank white screen when switching from portrait to landscape. I know that this may come off as a bit of a quibble, and it is, but a large iPad Pro just isn't very comfortable in portrait, and anything with videos really should be in landscape anyway. Besides, the app did pester me for a review, so here you go... All in all, a great service and an app that is more than usable, just not 5 starts great... yet. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. For every post of congratulations to the Figma team for having their years of hard work pay off, there were a dozen more lamenting what Adobe will do to their favorite… Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

app - Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Go Into The Story Scott Myers Follow Oct 6 · 9 min read · Member-only Save Tarantino, Sorkin, and Dialogue as Purpose Analysis of long dialogue-centric scenes in  The Social Network  and  Pulp Fiction  reveals that underneath the entertaining conversations lies their respective narrative function: to move the plot forward. Quentin Tarantino and Aaron Sorkin In a recent online class I taught on dialogue, the writers taking the course and I had some really enlightening discussions including this one about two masters in this arena: Aaron Sorkin and Quentin Tarantino. Both of them are known for the occasional long dialogue-laden scene and we might be tempted to interpret these as just being about entertainment. Read this excerpt from my first lecture which precipitated the online conversation, considering the screenwriting principle Dialogue = Purpose. The first 8+ pages of  The Social Network  script would appear to be the very epitome of  purposelessness . Apart from introducing two key characters — Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) and Erica (Rooney Mara) — the dialogue zigs and zags from one topic to the next, a confused quilt of references and observations. Here is a list of topics in the scene: People with genius IQs in China How to “distinguish yourself” amongst people who got 1600 on SAT’s A Capella choir, rowing crew, inventing a “25 dollar PC” Final club World class athletes rowing crew How girls like cowboys Exclusivity Various final clubs at Harvard with the Porc being the “best of the best” Theodore Roosevelt Mark’s friend Eduardo made $300,000 betting on oil futures Predicting weather and the price of heating oil Spat about Erica asking which final club is the “easiest to get into” Spat about Erica calling it “finals” club Spat about Erica calling Mark “obsessed,” he says he’s “motivated” Mark thinks Erica speaks in “code” Mark says “I need to do something substantial” to get the “attention” of the clubs Mark: “Because they’re exclusive. And fun and they lead to a better life.” Mark: “You should be a lot more supportive,” benefits for her if he was in a club She tells him she is no longer his girlfriend Mark says Erica used to sleep with the door guy of the club they’re drinking in Erica gets angry and says she’s leaving Mark tries to apologize Erica says dating Mark is “exhausting” Mark disparages B.U. (Boston University) where Erica goes to college Erica delivers two “stingers” and leaves him 8 plus pages. 111 sides of dialogue. Where is the purpose in this scene? Dialogue conveys exposition : If we define exposition as information, data, and backstory, we can see how Sorkin laces a lot of it into these pages: Information: Mark attends Harvard; Erica attends B.U.; the Porcellian is the most exclusive final club at Harvard; Teddy Roosevelt was a Porc. Data: The number of geniuses in China; Eduardo made $300K last year. Backstory: Mark got 1600 on his SAT; Mark and Erica have been romantically involved; Mark thinks Erica used to sleep with the door guy. This exposition is key in establishing the story’s setting (contemporary Harvard) and some of the basics of the Protagonist (Mark) and Attractor (Erica) characters. Dialogue reveals a character’s inner life : Through text and subtext, Sorkin conveys important aspects of both Mark and Erica’s thoughts and feelings: Mark: He is looking to distinguish himself; he feels pressure to do “something substantial” with his life; his reaction to Erica’s comment about the easiest final club shows he has personal insecurities; he thinks she should be more supportive of his desire to join a final club; Mark is dismissive of B.U. as an academic institution; his goal is a “better life.” Erica: She thinks Mark is “obsessed” with final clubs; she has a difficult time following Mark’s way of thinking and talking; she gets angry at Mark’s insensitivity (i.e., door guy accusation, derision of B.U. and by extension her own intellect); she finds being with Mark “exhausting.” The purpose of this facet of the scene’s dialogue is to go beyond exposition and provide readers a deeper insight into the inner workings of these two pivotal characters. Dialogue distinguishes one character from another : In what they say and how they say it, Sorkin creates a clear sense of Mark and Erica’s individual identities: Mark: He is extremely, almost excessively verbal; he is kinetic, his ideas spewing forth; he carries on his own internal conversation that often loses Erica; he is essentially humorless. Erica: Less intelligent, but smarter socially; she tries to use humor to make points (“You don’t care if side effects may include  blindness , okay, just do it,” “What part of Long Island are you from — England”); she is primarily reactive to him; she does not waffle in her decision to break up with him. There is also this subtle distinction between them. Whereas Erica is actually hurt by Mark’s derisive comments, unintentional though they may be, when Erica dumps him, Mark doesn’t feel distress so much as shock, as if it is unfathomable she would have any reason to terminate their relationship. At this level of purpose, Sorkin not only distinguishes the two characters in terms of the text of their words, but also the subtext, the deeper emotional meaning  under  their words. Dialogue moves the plot forward : Within the realm of a story universe, perhaps the single most important purpose of dialogue is to advance the plot. On the surface this extended exchange between these two characters in  The Social Network  seems precisely like a conversation with little or no substantive part to play in terms of the narrative. A closer examination reveals the scene moves the plot ahead in two ways: (1) The scene itself has a clear Beginning, Middle and End; (2) Its end point is a critical event that sets into motion everything else that follows in the plot. Scene structure: The Beginning of the scene revolves around establishing Mark’s powerful desire to get into a final club. The Middle involves Erica calling into question Mark’s obsession while Mark challenges her to support him, and in so doing provides one dismissive comment toward her after another. The Ending centers on Erica breaking up with Mark. Point of the scene: It’s the break-up and specifically Erica’s final lines to Mark as she leaves: Here is the scene from the movie: The point of the scene is two-fold: (1) Erica breaks up with Mark. (2) Erica’s parting shot becomes a verbal talisman to inspire Mark to make something of himself and join a final club. The scene’s ending dialogue caps off this key purpose of the scene tied to the plot. Mark Walker, one of the writers in the class, responded with this: I think that is a key observation that those new to screenwriting (like myself) need to get into their heads. I think, when I started out, I was probably of the mind that dialogue wasn’t as important as the scene description and visual “delivery” of the film. As I have wised up a bit (there is still a lot of room for further improvement) from reading books and blogs, and the SMC (Screenwriting Master Class), it has become clearer just how powerful good dialogue can be, let alone great dialogue. it is interesting to watch films knowing this and think about how the dialogue works so well. Scott’s example clearly shows this, and how it is an art to make it look like conversation when it actually isn’t. To throw all that stuff at you that you probably don’t recognize as character building and exposition until later in the movie when you get those call-backs that relate to some of that conversation and it all clicks into place, is a vital skill. I would compare this to Tarantino introducing Jules and Vincent as they approach the building where the guys with Marcellus’ brief case are waiting. An excerpt: Here’s the scene from the movie: I think we get all four of Scott’s purposes in that conversation which, on the surface of it, sounds like two guys just chewing the fat about work and shit. But we hear about (amongst everything else): Vincent being in Amsterdam — he has been away and missed some stuff We get banter about their weapons which tells us they are gangsters/hitmen….dangerous Jules is catching him up about the guy that gave Mia foot massage This tells us their boss is a hard man not to be messed with We hear Vincent has been asked to “take her out” while Marcellus is away — setting up the next part of the story. Jules concern in relation to foot massages tells us more about their boss and theor perception of him. The dialogue tells us about the suitcase Macguffin. We get to learn that Vincent and Jules are very different — Jules is respectful and more refined than Vincent who is a little more brash — all found from a conversation about giving foot massages We get everything; exposition, inner life of the characters, we learn how they are different from each other and plot moves forward with regards the macguffin. By the time we are ready to kick the door down we know exactly who these two guys are, what they do for a living and who they work for, as well as a bit about their past and what is in store for them (or at least Vincent) in the next chapter. None of the dialogue is “wasted” or “filler” — like everything else with screenwriting — if it doesn’t serve the story, does it need to be cut? That example you cite from  Pulp Fiction  works as entertainment straight-out, thus if we don’t look closer, we may assume it’s just QT riffing with dialogue, pure and simple. But if we  do  examine the content, we see, as you pointed out so well with your analysis, Mark, that there is a purpose to the conversation; in fact,  several  of them, in effect setting up a few important subplots. A comparison of this scene and the opening to  The Social Network  reveals that everything hangs on the dialogue’s tie-in to and advancement of the plot. In fact, if one were to boil down each scene to the single most important contribution each makes to the plot, it’s right there: Pulp Fiction : To establish the upcoming “date” Vincent is going to have with Mia and the pressure he will be under to handle that properly re Marcellus and his temper. That sets everything in that subplot into motion including Vincent scoring the heroin as a way of taking the edge of the date which leads to Mia overdosing on it (thinking it’s cocaine), and so forth. The Social Network : The breakup of Mark and Erica which, as the denouement shows [even though the entirety of their subplot is only four or five beats], provides one huge motivation on Mark’s part to succeed: To prove he has worth in response to her rejection of him. Takeaway: Dialogue = Purpose. This is true even if you go off on a riff à la Tarantino and Sorkin. Tie the dialogue to those four markers, but most especially to the advancement of the plot. I don’t care how good you are with dialogue, if you write a scene in which the dialogue has zero impact on the plot, you should consider reshaping the scene to make it relevant to the plot or drop the scene entirely as being extraneous. What are your thoughts about how important dialogue is to plot? Comment Archive -- -- 1 More from Go Into The Story Follow Official Screenwriting Blog of The Black List Read more from    Go Into The Story Recommended from Medium Robert Ralph in New Writers Welcome How to add a signature file Ilana Quinn in Writers’ Blokke How to Research for Historical Fiction Sakshi Udavant (Luna) in The Brave Writer A Client Just Rejected My Work And I Have Never Been Happier Ellie Jacobson Get Your Write On: Setting Yourself Up for NaNoWriMo Success Sherry McGuinn in Rogues’ Gallery Men, Got a Problem With the Ladies? Jessica A in The Book Mechanic 4 Personal Qualities All Successful Writers Share Rosa de Saron C. in Publishing Well Is Writing Long Form Really Worth It Scott A. Gese in Success in Mind Medium: Are You Sure You Want to Take This Ride? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Scott Myers 35K Followers Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable App Store   Preview The app asked for a review so here it is: You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Get the app Try for free Listen. Learn. Level up. Learn today’s most in-demand skills with actionable, podcast-style lessons from top experts. Join 40,000+ founders, professionals, creators, and ambitious know-it-alls getting smarter on the go. Try for free Featured by: Popular courses More popular courses Nutrition Plant-Based Performance Chris Paul, NBA All-Star Chris Paul teaches lessons on plant-based eating and explains how transforming his diet transformed his game. He's joined by a team of chefs and academics to explore the possibilities of simple, healthful plant-based nutrition and inspire elite and armchair athletes alike to change their minds about green eating. View course Startups Launch a Startup Alexis Ohanian, Reddit co-founder Starting a company is hard in the best of times. Starting one today might seem downright impossible. It's not. Era-defining businesses like Instagram, Slack, and Uber were all born into down economies. And even as the world turns upside-down, new opportunities are emerging for smart entrepreneurs. In this course, Reddit’s Alexis Ohanian, Everlane’s Michael Preysman, and a team of Silicon Valley experts teach you how to responsibly prepare for the possibilities and challenges of building your own company. They’ll walk you through the steps of launching a high-growth startup and provide you with winning strategies for drafting your business plan, securing funding, developing your product, and much more. View course Leadership How to Dream, Lead, and Achieve Scott Kelly, NASA astronaut “If you can dream it, you can do it.” As an engineer, naval aviator, record-setting astronaut, and commander of the International Space Station, Scott Kelly has lived his life by these words. In this candid and entertaining course, Scott shares instructive stories from his childhood in New Jersey, his days as a US Navy test pilot, and his year hurtling around the globe at 17,500 MPH and teaches hard-earned lessons on perseverance, mental fortitude, mission-readiness, and personal motivation drawn from his experiences in the most competitive, extreme environments imaginable. View course Wellness The Pursuit of Happier Kristen Meinzer, writer The self-help industry is worth over a billion dollars, but advice from celebrities and stars doesn’t always stick. And now, more than ever, happiness feels very out of reach. So, in this course, we turn to academics, researchers, and scientists who give it to us straight — how can we be happy? Host and self-help skeptic Kristen Meinzer leads the search for what actually makes us a little stronger, a little more fulfilled, and a little happier. View course Leadership Your Network Is Your Net Worth Chris Lyons of Andreessen Horowitz As a Managing Partner at Andreessen Horowitz, Chris Lyons’s job relies on the strength of his network and his ability to leverage it to create new opportunities for his company and the founders he works with every day. Early in Chris’s career, one of his mentors, Silicon Valley pioneer Ken Coleman, shared a piece of advice he’ll never forget: “Your network is your net worth.” In other words: business is all about relationships. Being great at your job only gets you halfway there. Your network — and by extension your reputation — gets you the rest of the way. In this course, Chris shares what he’s learned over the years to help you build a more powerful, impactful network that can help accelerate your career. View course Confidence Speak with Confidence Celeste Headlee, TED speaker and author Whether you're nervous speaking publicly, anxious in social settings, or just want to get ahead at work, learning the techniques of effective communication will change the way you approach every interaction. Join master communicators, speechwriters, and vocal coaches as they teach you how to speak in any setting, from presenting to clients, to giving a wedding toast, to schmoozing at dinner parties. View course Cooking How to Eat Now Mark Bittman, bestselling food writer and former NYT columnist Designed for busy people, this course is celebrated food writer Mark Bittman’s guide to being an eater in the modern world. Bittman reveals his vision for the future of food and shares his best advice—and plenty of new insights—for cooking and eating healthfully and sustainably. You’ll also hear from chef Holly Haines about dining with company. After just four hours, you’ll be equipped to eat better, cook more often, and savor the good life in a truly sustainable way. View course Power tip People like to follow people way more than they like to follow brands. Elon Musk has 43M followers on Twitter, Tesla has 7M. ~ Nick Martell from  Branding for Founders Smarties around the world love Knowable Ready to jump in? Get the free app ©   2022    Knowable • Home Log in Subscribe Help & FAQ Terms Privacy The developer,  A Medium Corporation , indicated that the app’s privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the  developer’s privacy policy . [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started Level Up Coding Coding tutorials and news. The developer homepage gitconnected.com && skilled.dev && levelup.dev Write For Us 🎤 Interviews Day Trader Dashboard TOP CODING JOBS 🚀➡️ Follow Following 🔥 Hot Off the Press Type Challenges: Implement the RequiredByKeys<T, K> Utility Type Type Challenges: Implement the RequiredByKeys<T, K> Utility Type The Built-In Required Generic Are Not Flexible, the RequiredByKeys Generics Come to the Rescue. Bytefer Oct 6 CodePush: The Right Way CodePush: The Right Way This article is not about installing CodePush or how to use it. You can always refer the documentation at… Burak Erdem Oct 6 Building a multi-page app with Streamlit and restricting user access to pages using AWS Cognito Building a multi-page app with Streamlit and restricting user access to pages using AWS Cognito This article shows how to create a multi-page app for your data science projects using Streamlit while allowing log in functionality and… Mausam Gaurav Oct 6 Hire amazing developers from the Level Up community! Click Here to Learn More You Should Write Bad Code You Should Write Bad Code How to embrace absurdity and unlock more creative coding David Amos Oct 5 Getting Started With React-Bootstrap UI Library Getting Started With React-Bootstrap UI Library Learn how to install and use Bootstrap in your React projects —  the right way. Tara Prasad Routray Oct 5 10 Things You Should Know As A Data Scientist 10 Things You Should Know As A Data Scientist An overview of Data Scientist skills Mickaël Andrieu Oct 5 5 Platforms that will fuel your coding motivation! 5 Platforms that will fuel your coding motivation! A short list of the best platforms where you can practice programming while having fun. StackZero Oct 5 World’s Largest Bitcoin Loser Threw Away $161 Million — Here’s Why True Decentralisation May Not… World’s Largest Bitcoin Loser Threw Away $161 Million — Here’s Why True Decentralisation May Not… Between 2.3 and 3.7 million Bitcoin are lost to the Cryptocurrency gods forever. Jayden Levitt Oct 5 Ditch GraphQL When It Gets in the Way Ditch GraphQL When It Gets in the Way Are you or your team struggling with GraphQL concepts or does it feel too heavy for what you are building? Here are signs to watch out for. Andrew Courter Oct 5 React Context Pitfall: How to Avoid It React Context Pitfall: How to Avoid It Recently I was working on a piece of code and encountered an interesting problem. Fedor Selenskiy Oct 5 Why Docker is Awesome Why Docker is Awesome Want to run some software on your machine but don’t want to download every dependency? Docker has changed the way software is developed. Andrew Courter Oct 4 Design Patterns: Builder Pattern in TypeScript Design Patterns: Builder Pattern in TypeScript Master the Builder Pattern and Easily Handle the Creation of Objects. Bytefer Oct 4 Facebook Software Engineer Interview Handbook (2022) Facebook Software Engineer Interview Handbook (2022) Learn what it’s like to interview at Facebook in 2022 as a software engineer. Arslan Ahmad Oct 4 Python is Destroying the Planet Python is Destroying the Planet The most significant damage caused by Python Mohammed Ayar Oct 4 My Takeaways — Implementing a Strong Code-Review Culture My Takeaways — Implementing a Strong Code-Review Culture Code reviews are not about catching bugs. It’s about discussing a solution with your peer. Anas Anjaria Oct 4 Advanced Python: Decorators Advanced Python: Decorators This post will show how we can use python decorators effectively, and write one for your own requirements. Sandipan Dutta Oct 4 10 Apps For Your Homelab In 2022 10 Apps For Your Homelab In 2022 If you’re running a homelab, you may already be running lots of applications for your own personal cloud or to assist in running your… Aaron Berry Oct 4 10 Unexplored Ways to Use Python Loops 10 Unexplored Ways to Use Python Loops This will help you in competitive programming Pranjal Saxena Oct 4 About Level Up Coding Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy I've only been on Medium for two months. I was pleasantly surprised by the content. It wasn't all clickbait. I went to a Medium live writing session and the teacher was charming and funny. So I decided to stick around.  I have an iPhone 12 Pro and no internet issues. Not sure why Medium crashes like this. Maybe tracking? I don't know. That's why i didnt get a membership before. The site is built, be to track your reading and I didn't like that lack of privacy. However, some writers I loved were on it, which legitimized it. I need to find more writers of interest to follow. As much as I probably could use the "I made $$$ this month from writing here's how" articles and how relatable that journey was, I get resentful of clickbait titles and worse, the consistent typos on the especially clickbaity ones that manage to snag me. I am interested in productivity, etc, but it's hard to tease out what's real and what's just a content creator maximising his brand.  By the third click or so, the app freezes for me. I would love for this to change so I can see the direction Medium is growing. I think they mean well and have lofty aspirations. For me, not crashing would be a good start. Thanks. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write 108K Followers Follow Home About Creators Hub Scott Lamb · Sep 21 Updates on Medium’s distribution system Clarity on how distribution works, and a change to notifications —  One of our most important jobs here at Medium is to connect readers with valuable stories. We’re always updating and improving our system to do that crucial job better. Today, we’re taking a minute to clarify how distribution on Medium works. Until recently, our distribution system was binary, where some… Medium 2 min read Alex Benzer · Sep 9 Android Audio and Homepage Topics New updates to help you get more value from your reading time —  Your time matters. That’s why our team is committed to helping you get the most out of the time you spend reading on Medium. This means helping you find stories that are relevant to your interests and goals; knowledge that goes beyond entertainment to positively impact your life. … Medium 3 min read Medium Staff · Aug 29 It Happened on Medium: The First 10 Years A somewhat complete history of our first decade, and the stories that got us talking, thinking, and sharing —  Medium turned 10 this month. A decade ago, we built a place on the internet for stories that aren’t too long or too short, but… that in-between length. Our simple, beautiful publishing tools gave you the freedom to focus on your words, and our platform connected you with other readers… Medium 13 min read Breana Jones · Aug 24 Custom Domains, Mobile Editor, and a True Following Feed Working towards an innovative product you can rely on —  A big part of our work at Medium centers around earning and building trust with you, our readers, and creators. We want to be clear where we can and we want to build in public with you. In that vein, we have a couple of announcements to share. Custom Domains are back for good We first… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Breana Jones · Aug 5 Make Medium Yours It’s now easier to own your experience —  Hola readers and creators, I’m back to share more updates! I mentioned in my last 3MR that we value listening to you, and we make changes based on your feedback. One thing we’ve heard is that you aren’t always satisfied with the recommendations you see on your homepage. That’s something… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Alex Benzer · Aug 3 Introducing Tipping on Medium (beta) Add a customizable tipping button to your stories and start receiving direct support from your readers. —  “How can we make writing more sustainable and rewarding?” That question has always been top of mind for our team here at Medium. … Medium 2 min read Breana Jones · Aug 2 Listening shows up in the details A few changes that wouldn’t normally deserve their own blog post. —  Recently we’ve started being more clear about how much we value listening to our community. Or as our new CEO Tony Stubblebine says, : “Help mold the future of Medium by telling us what is important to you.” I’m one of the people who wants to hear from you. … 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Sandee Roston · Jul 12 Medium names technology and digital media veteran Tony Stubblebine CEO; founder Ev Williams transitions to Chairman of the Board Medium announced today that Tony Stubblebine will become Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors, effective July 20, 2022. Medium founder and Chief Executive Officer Ev Williams will transition to the newly-created role of chairman of the board. Ev Williams founded Medium in 2012, and has… Medium 2 min read Tony Stubblebine · Jul 12 Hello Medium readers, authors, editors and publishers I’m the new CEO. —  There are so many different reasons to read Medium and so many different reasons to publish on Medium. We are a very large community consisting of hundreds of millions of readers and many thousands of authors. That is our strength. I know this because I’ve been deeply involved with Medium… 3 min read Alex Benzer · May 16 Listen to stories anytime, anywhere. Audio is now on iOS. Today, following the success of audio on the Medium website, we’re rolling out the feature to our iOS app. Making it easy to soak up new ideas is the heart of Medium’s mission — and now that’s more convenient than ever. … Medium 3 min read Get started The official Medium blog Follow Connect with    3 min read Editors Medium Staff News and updates from the staff at Medium. Follow Alex Benzer Director of Product @ Medium Follow Warren Shaeffer vp @medium, co-founder @knowablefyi, 3x co-founder (human + biz), very lucky, medium funny. wip. Follow See all Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started SportsRaid Original reporting and curated sports data journalism. Actively looking for additional writers. NFL NBA MLB AFL 60th More Stories About Us Follow Latest Babe Ruth: The Life and Baseball Career of The Great Bambino Babe Ruth: The Life and Baseball Career of The Great Bambino A turbulent childhood and an iconic baseball legend Javad Luckey Oct 6 The Origin Story of Baseball & Baseball Cards The Origin Story of Baseball & Baseball Cards Baseball history is as old as America itself. And baseball cards are 175+ years old. Javad Luckey Oct 3 Nick Chubb Is Laying Claim To The “Best Running Back Alive” Title Nick Chubb Is Laying Claim To The “Best Running Back Alive” Title Through the first three games of the 2022 season, nobody has rushed for more yards, and been more productive doing so. Rajan Nanavati Sep 30 What Does One Have To Do To Be Definitively Ahead of Jordan All Time? What Does One Have To Do To Be Definitively Ahead of Jordan All Time? Michael Jordan and the G.O.A.T (greatest of all time) argument is unfair. Breaking The Glass Sep 28 Nick’s Picks — NFL Week 2 … Away Teams Reign Supreme Nick’s Picks — NFL Week 2 … Away Teams Reign Supreme While week one did not go as planned (a slight understatement — it was an all-out bloodbath), we move forward! It’s only right that my… Nick Atwood Sep 23 NBA  The Story of the First Chinese NBA Player: Wang Zhizhi The Story of the First Chinese NBA Player: Wang Zhizhi Before Yao Ming, there was Wang Zhizhi. This is his story. Javad Luckey Sep 21 Off-Season NBA Instagram Off-Season NBA Instagram Contract Campaigning & Fashion Nova Ads Skyler Nielsen-Sorensen Sep 6 NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Western Conference) NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Western Conference) Welcome to part two where I lay out my predictions for the upcoming NBA season, and analyze my picks, division by division. In my last… Edward Campanelli Sep 4 NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Eastern Conference) NBA Preview: Standings Prediction (Eastern Conference) This is the first part of my two-part series where I lay out my standings predictions for the upcoming NBA season, and analyze my picks… Edward Campanelli Aug 23 Early Evaluations of Five Top 2023 Draft Prospects Early Evaluations of Five Top 2023 Draft Prospects It may be the dog days of the 2022 offseason, but fans and reporters are already looking ahead to the 2023 Draft. The incoming rookie class… Jordan Pagkalinawan Aug 9 Kevin Durant Still Loves Kyrie Irving Kevin Durant Still Loves Kyrie Irving Rejoice — Bromance is still alive! At least in Brooklyn where, moments ago, The Athletic broke the news that Kevin Durant gave Nets owner… Nick Atwood Aug 8 Bill Russell’s Quietly Defiant Life Bill Russell’s Quietly Defiant Life He outlived his rivals, teammates and the racism and hatred of the city where he played but did not represent. Kent Anderson Aug 1 Explaining the Fallout From This Morning’s Celtics/Nets News Explaining the Fallout From This Morning’s Celtics/Nets News Late last night, Adrian Wojnarowski announced that the Boston Celtics “have emerged among teams engaged in talks on a possible deal” for… Edward Campanelli Jul 25 About SportsRaid Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy Download our app so you can read wherever you are. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Buck Down Follow Oct 4 · 13 min read · Member-only What the Fuck Just Happened at Burning Man? image by  Chayna Girling I t’s been just under four weeks since I returned from Burning Man. My 15th deployment there as an employee and the 24th overall. Like a LOT of other people — I’m still trying to sort out what  the fuck  just happened back there. I’m one of the lucky ones. I was only out there for a month. There are still friends of mine out there that have been there since July who won’t get cut loose to fend for themselves until… -- -- 20 More from Buck Down Follow Professional traveling musician, artist and writer. Amateur comedian and smart person. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Rebbie Elise Interview: Stand-up comedian Natasha Brock on Periods, Representation and Laughing *with*… Pamela Nicolas SNOW WHITE: The Fairest of Them All Journal Starting with R Early morning thoughts Andrew Katz Where is the “too” in Dylan Farrow’s #me? Robert Cormack The Oddity of Words. Bill Keshlear The Way of the West: Culture displacement and appropriation Sufiya Abdur-Rahman in Gay Mag The Superhero Show Challenging Viewers on Racial Injustice mel I Have To Explain The Joke About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Buck Down 783 Followers Professional traveling musician, artist and writer. Amateur comedian and smart person. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Our app brings the full Medium experience wherever you are, so you can read, write and publish even when youâre offline. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in ITNEXT Glauber Costa Follow Oct 4 · 6 min read Save SQLite: QEMU all over again? In a trip down memory lane, I recall my experience with QEMU, and how the project changed completely to accommodate a new industry trend. Is SQLite history rhyming all over again? I first heard of QEMU in the early 2000s. QEMU was the brainchild of  Fabrice Bellard . Fabrice is, without any exaggeration, a true genius. Don’t believe me? Those are just some of his achievements from his Wikipedia page: Came up with the formula  for calculating the nth digit of pi in base 16. Computed pi to 2.7 trillion digits with a desktop computer for the first time, in 2009. Created  FFmpeg , one of the most widely used video encoders. Created  QEMU , a fast full-system emulator translating between pretty much every processor architecture. How emulators worked before QEMU I first heard of QEMU around 2006. I was into computer architecture from my early days, and most emulators at the time would simply naively translate instructions from into the emulated architecture at runtime. QEMU, on the other hand, employed a “Tiny Code Generator” to translate instructions through JIT compilation. It wasn’t as fast as running natively, but for a variety of applications it was  fast enough  and for many use cases it felt like pure miracle. QEMU also had its own emulation for common physical devices you would expect to find, its own  disk image format , and much more. Virtualization shifts the industry But around that time, something else was brewing. Virtualization was becoming mainstream in the industry. The idea of virtualization is different from emulation. If you are just trying to run an isolated workload, and not something for a different architecture altogether, you can just execute the instructions natively. This is easier said than done, because processors have privileged instructions that would allow you to access other virtual machines. But the approach pioneered by the Xen project in 2004, called paravirtualization, suggested that if you are okay with changing the Operating System — since user programs can’t call into privileged instructions anyway — then you can safely run many virtual machines together to get the job done. Later, both Intel and AMD released their own process extensions that would provide a shadow view of the processor’s privileged state and allow solutions like KVM, which later came to power AWS’s Nitro to rise. Getting QEMU to do Virtualization Both of those solutions solved the problem of how to execute VM instructions. But a full solution also requires the VMs to have isolated views of  devices,  like sound cards, graphic cards, disks, etc. QEMU had all that, and was pretty awesome, and everybody wanted to reuse it. But QEMU was a solution for emulation, not virtualization. QEMU was an open source project, but the community was not very interested in the whole virtualization thing. As a matter of fact, being mostly maintained by volunteers, the community didn’t seem very interested in a lot except for a very narrow set of personal interests. And hey, no judgment here: I too have maintained things as an unpaid volunteer, and I know how hard it is! But be it as it may, we now had this amazing solution that did  almost  everything we needed, a lot of other communities building things around it, trying their best to keep things unchanged for ease of upgrade reasons. Until the inevitable happened: we forked QEMU through the  qemu-kvm  project. No contributions led to fragmentation In a sense, because everybody was taking bits and pieces of QEMU to build their device models, QEMU  was already forked.  That work laid the foundation that enabled QEMU itself (albeit a fork of it), to be extended for the purpose of virtualization by replacing the processor emulation with a native one. This repository became a common one for all parties interested in pushing the envelope of what QEMU could do, and over time, that essentially became the  new  QEMU: it could still do Emulation as well as before — or better, since many of the improvements were very generic, but now could also do virtualization, opening up a completely new applications for the project. Is SQLite at a similar fork in the road? When I look around today, I see a very similar situation developing around SQLite. SQLite is the brainchild of  D. Richard Hipp , who was also involved with the  Tcl  programming language, and his  own version control system , among others. Same as Fabrice, an undoubtedly smart and achieved individual. The code for SQLite is also available, but contributing is even harder than it was at the QEMU days: SQLite is explicitly and unequivocally “ Open Source, not Open Contribution ”. The few core developers they have do not work with modern tools like git and collaboration tools like Github, and don’t accept contributions, although they may or may not accept your suggestion for a new feature request. Much like QEMU, new trends in the industry are taking it into a completely new direction: the rise of use cases around Edge compute, due to its limited resources and limited environments means that SQLite fits the bill perfectly. However, edge computing also means that your code will be running in many geographical locations, as close as possible to the user for the better possible latency. Which means that the data that hits a single SQLite instance now needs to be replicated to all the others. Parallels between the rise of Virtualization and the rise of the Edge. Many solutions to the problem of how to run SQLite, but with distributed data emerged. A few notable of them are: rqlite : a full blown distributed database similar to CockroachDB, but using SQLite as a storage engine. You talk to it over the wire, and it is no longer an embeddable database. BedrockdB : similar to rqlite, also built around SQLite. dqlite : a combination of SQLite & RAFT, written in C, that keeps the embeddable aspect of SQLite. But because you have to be explicit about the networking events, ORMs like sqlx won’t work and/or have to be adapted. ChiselStore : My own attempt at the problem. Close to dqlite (but in Rust), and ultimately, as I found out, suffers from many of the same problems. LiteFS : as its biggest advantage, it is the fact that it sits  behind  SQLite, so everything that works with SQLite, works with LiteFS. Something’s gotta give, and under the current limitations of not changing SQLite, their approach is to essentially provide a distributed FUSE filesystem that spreads the writes and deals with the consensus problems. It comes with its own set of issues, many of them raised in this  HackerNews thread . I personally think that if distributed filesystems were easy, we’d have a good one by now. But under the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed, it is the best approach by far. Kudos to Ben and the team! What if SQLite accepted contributions? Why the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed? Sure, nobody wants to keep patched software around, and nobody wants to require users to install alternative versions of core software like SQLite. This is a classic  prisoner’s dilemma  situation: if one of us carries a fork of SQLite, that’s a losing proposition in the long term. As the story of QEMU — and frankly many others — teaches us, if we manage to convene together, we all win. That is why today I am starting, together with some of my peers,  libSQL . It is a place for all of us to come together and build a new generation of what SQLite as an embedded database should be. We want to build a strong and independent community, with a clear code of conduct, and if you ever felt like SQLite could change to accommodate the future, you’re more than welcome to come build with us. There are more details of what we want to achieve on our  manifesto . Here are some issues we’d like to tackle: We would like to use io_uring and asynchronous interfaces We would like to provide replication hooks for distributed systems We would like to allow for WASM-based user-defined functions What would you like to contribute? I’m all ears. You can reach out to us at: Github Discussions Discord -- -- 6 More from ITNEXT Follow ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. Read more from    ITNEXT Recommended from Medium Harshita Shivhare License to Freedom Learner CARES in Analytics Vidhya Part 3.2 !! Pandas DataFrame to PostgreSQL using Python Bromcom Switching MIS: So you’re thinking of switching Bruno Morel in B-Yond The Blog Ending the myth of the 10x, 100x, SuperStar programmer — quants Nekrasov Aleksandr Dates in java-based REST API’s Tom Jebbo (PycraftDev) How we are making a Video Game in Python #7 Juan in Analytics Vidhya Emmy Awards — Building my own R Shiny Framework David Khourshid CSS Animations with Finite State Machines About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Glauber Costa 518 Followers Founder and CEO of ChiselStrike. Join me!  https://github.com/chiselstrike/chiselstrike .  https://discord.com/invite/GHNN9CNAZe . Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Hi there, thank you for the review and the exhaustive feedback! Our team is currently looking into the issues that you reported, and you might see some of them resolved in one of the upcoming app updates. If you have any more suggestions or need help with anything else, please let us know by contacting us via the support form at help.medium.com. App Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started Cotten.IO Follow Following Latest That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right? Story time! Tim Cotten Oct 2 GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities GDC 2022 React. Metaverse Games: State of Play and Opportunities Reactions to Dom Tait’s (Omdia) talk on current and future developments in Metaverse/VR technology, including reviews of games like… Tim Cotten Mar 21 Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s Why I Quit My Job On New Year’s (to Found My Startup) Tim Cotten Jan 1 A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims A Christmas Miracle: Justin Kan and Fractal Team Donate $150k to Scam Victims The Fractal Team, led by Justin Kan — creator of Twitch — donated $150k out of their own pockets to victims of the infamous December 21st… Tim Cotten Dec 23, 2021 The $150k Discord Crypto Hack The $150k Discord Crypto Hack How 370 Crypto Fans Lost it All in 10 Minutes Tim Cotten Dec 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: Property Problems PHP Bugs: Property Problems You screwed up. You know what you did was wrong. How are you gonna make things right? PHP forgives but never forgets undefined properties. Tim Cotten May 5, 2021 PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets PHP Bugs: Arrays Don’t Like Undefined Offsets Undefined offset errors are the integer-based cousins to the string-based Undefined indexes errors, and like a bad penny they always seem… Tim Cotten Apr 28, 2021 PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects PHP Bugs: Confusing Non-Objects for Objects If you see this error, you’ve either made a terrible assumption about your incoming data, or misunderstood the data  you’re working with. Tim Cotten Apr 21, 2021 PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes PHP Bugs: The Curse of Magic Quotes Do you believe in ghosts? How about the kind that mangle your user’s input in the name of security while still failing to secure anything? Tim Cotten Apr 14, 2021 PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types PHP Bugs: Undefined Indexes and Loose Types Undefined indexes, just like undefined variables and undefined properties, are the silent killers stalking your users. Tim Cotten Apr 7, 2021 PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP Bugs: Misspellings and Undefined Variables PHP is so permissive about undefined variables that they don’t show up as Errors or Warnings, but as Notices. But they’re still important. Tim Cotten Mar 31, 2021 Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Tracing the Twitter Hacked Bitcoins Following the Digital Trail of the CryptoForHealth Scammers Tim Cotten Jul 31, 2020 Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Fixing SEM Campaigns with Python Identifying Click Fraud and Broken UTM Strings in Apache Logs Tim Cotten Mar 27, 2020 One Lambda to Rule Them All One Lambda to Rule Them All A Python Adventure in AWS (Feat. API Gateway) Tim Cotten Mar 20, 2020 How to Eat Gas in Ethereum How to Eat Gas in Ethereum Consuming 99.9% of the Gas Limit in an Ethereum Transaction Tim Cotten Feb 13, 2020 Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Greedy ‘Connect 4’ For Fun and Profit Implementing a Simple Agent in Kaggle’s New Simulations Competition Tim Cotten Jan 5, 2020 “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit “Here’s My Private Key, Try Stealing My Ether!” He Dared Reddit An Attention Grabbing Marketing Stunt By blockd Tim Cotten Jan 3, 2020 Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? Have Google and Bing Gotten Better At Answering Questions? A Survey of Test Queries from Lotfi Zadeh’s 2006 Work Tim Cotten Jan 2, 2020 Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier Delaying the Inevitable: Muir Glacier EIP 2387/EIP 2384 and the Delay of Ethereum’s Difficulty Bomb Tim Cotten Jan 1, 2020 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Deploying the Libra Core Blockchain Currency on Amazon EC2 Configuration and Installation of a Cloud-hosted Libra Testnet Node Tim Cotten Jun 24, 2019 About Cotten.IO Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started ITNEXT ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. About ITNEXT Write for ITNEXT Events & Videos SUMMIT Vacancies @ LINKIT Follow Following What Makes Julia Unique? What Makes Julia Unique? A look at how multiple dispatch distinguishes Julia from all other programming languages Erik Engheim Oct 8 Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode It is hard to submit spark jobs on kubernetes. As mentioned in the previous post of Hive on Spark in Kubernetes in which it is shown that… Kidong Lee Oct 8 Tutorial: Polymorphism in C Tutorial: Polymorphism in C This tutorial develops examples of polymorphism into a full program, showing why such techniques are useful and how to implement them. Christopher Bazley Oct 8 Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt made its debut back in late 2015. It is a free Certificate Authority provided by the Internet Security Research Group. The… Scotti Fletcher Oct 7 Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… One of the issues we all face in current times when developing software is the need and the will to monitor and keep applications in check… João Esperancinha Oct 7 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Elixir and Erlang are functional programming languages both running on BEAM virtual machine. Programs in both languages get compiled into… Mohammad Molla Oct 7 We are looking for an Azure Devops Automation Engineer Are you looking for a new challenge? Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy A web proxy is a perfect place to start collecting telemetry data without required engineering efforts. Nicolas Takashi Oct 6 Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Based on kubeadm or k3s, k0s, you choose… Luc Juggery Oct 6 How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose Tobias Wissmueller Oct 5 A Deep Dive of CVE-2022–33987 (Got allows a redirect to a UNIX socket) Every week, almost without fail, I come across one thing that confuses, entertains, or most commonly infuriates me. I’ve decided to keep a… Chaim Sanders Oct 5 What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? Zig lets you run code during compilation. What are the implications? Erik Engheim Oct 5 From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide I stumbled upon Angular 3 years ago when I started my first job as an Application Development Associate and I have to admit that I totally… Stavros Droutsas Oct 5 About ITNEXT Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy [if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started The Official Screenwriting Blog of the Black List Named "Best of the Best" Scriptwriting Website by Writer's Digest Archives Reader Questions Black List Contact Screenwriting Master Class Follow Following Scott's Teaching Create a Compelling Protagonist Create a Compelling Protagonist Workshop and develop your story’s Protagonist in my one-week online class which begins Monday, October 10th. Scott Myers Sep 28 “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” “The Protagonist’s Journey: An Introduction to Character-Driven Screenwriting and Storytelling” My book is now available both as a paperback and eBook. Scott Myers Apr 4 Today's Posts Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” Sundays with Sidney Lumet’s “Making Movies” A series featuring reflections on filmmaking by one of the truly great movie directors. Scott Myers Oct 9 The Trouble with “Character Flaw” The Trouble with “Character Flaw” “Characters, at least good ones, are multilayered individuals.” Scott Myers Oct 9 Great Scene: “Halloween” Great Scene: “Halloween” This is one of the iconic scenes in the history of horror movies: Laurie (Jamie Lee Curtis) versus Michael Myers (Tony Moran) in the Final… Scott Myers Oct 9 Video: “Magic Flight” Video: “Magic Flight” Another in the excellent screenwriting series Raising the Stakes. Scott Myers Oct 9 Page One: “Spy” (2015) Page One: “Spy” (2015) Written by Paul Feig Scott Myers Oct 9 Featured Articles Private Script Workshops Private Script Workshops On a limited basis, I work one-on-one with writers on their script project. Scott Myers Jan 22, 2018 About Screenwriting Master Class About Screenwriting Master Class Premier online learning resource with Tom Benedek and Scott Myers. Scott Myers Nov 12, 2016 My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters My Interviews with 53 Black List Screenwriters Over the years, I’ve interviewed dozens of writers whose scripts appeared on the annual Black List. Their collective insight into the craft… Scott Myers Apr 17, 2018 Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Go Into The Story: “Best of the Best” Scriptwriting Website Named to the 20th Annual Writer’s Digest 101 Best Websites for Writers list. Scott Myers Apr 16, 2018 100+ Archive Links 100+ Archive Links In 14 years of hosting Go Into The Story, the site has accumulated 30,000+ posts covering just about every subject related to… Scott Myers Nov 10, 2016 100 Scene-Writing Prompts 100 Scene-Writing Prompts At a fundamental level, screenwriting is scene-writing. Use these prompts to improve your scene-writing chops. Scott Myers Nov 11, 2017 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting 100 Screenwriters on Screenwriting Professional screenwriters reflect on the craft. Scott Myers Aug 15, 2017 100s of Writer Interviews 100s of Writer Interviews You can learn a lot from professional writers talking about their craft. Scott Myers Nov 27, 2017 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks 12 Free Go Into The Story eBooks Nearly 1,000 pages on the craft and business of screenwriting. Scott Myers Aug 29, 2021 Script Download Links Script Download Links 100+ scripts made available by studios and production companies. Scott Myers Feb 8, 2017 About Go Into The Story Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. For every post of congratulations to the Figma team for having their years of hard work pay off, there were a dozen more lamenting what Adobe will do to their favorite… Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Boris Müller Follow Mar 8, 2019 · 6 min read · Member-only Type Casting — or: The Comic Sans of Errors Typefaces resemble actors. Helvetica is Tom Hanks.  But who is Comic Sans? Calligraphy:  Stefanie Weigele A  common question in my first-year design seminars is also a popular question in the design community: ‘Why is Comic Sans considered such a bad typeface?’ Discussing typefaces with people who have just started to learn and practice design is… -- -- 31 More from Boris Müller Follow Professor for Interaction Design at FH Potsdam, co-director of Urban Complexity Lab | http://uclab.fh-potsdam.de | http://esono.com Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Shadows Pub in Coffee Muse Valentine’s Doodles & Quotes Andy Woodruff Your maps are not lying to you The Kitchn Pro Best Ever Kitchen Island Decoration Ideas Yellow Images How To Use Mockups with 3D Smart Layers Nathalie J Siegel Surrealism in a Movie Filmed at the Merchandise Mart and in a Chicago Michelin Star Restaurant Oğuzhan Öçalan in Bootcamp Case study: Newslabturkey identity design Nicole Hewitt What does fitness mean to you? Catherine Erzetic in code3100 WEEK 5: PROCESS TO BUILDING AN IDEA About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Boris Müller 5.8K Followers Professor for Interaction Design at FH Potsdam, co-director of Urban Complexity Lab |  http://uclab.fh-potsdam.de  |  http://esono.com Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium is an open platform where over 100 million readers come to find insightful and dynamic thinking. Here, expert and undiscovered voices alike dive into the heart of any topic and bring new ideas to the surface. Use the Medium app to easily find and follow the writers and publications that matter to you, and keep up on their latest posts. Explore personalized, ad-free recommendations, and dive deeper on just about any topic. Bookmark posts for later, highlight passages that resonate, and join the conversation on the stories you read. Receive unlimited access to all Medium stories and support great writing by becoming a member for $5/month or $50/year, and enjoy your first month free. Your Medium membership will automatically renew each month or each year, and you will be charged $4.99 or $49.99 through your iTunes account within 24-hours prior to the end of the current monthly or yearly cycle. You can turn off auto-renew at any time from your iTunes account settings up until 24-hours before the end of the current period, but refunds will not be provided for any unused portion of the term. Please visit our Membership Terms of Service for more information: https://me.dm/subscription-terms Medium Terms of Service: https://policy.medium.com/medium-terms-of-service-9db0094a1e0f Questions? Feedback? To get help, visit https://help.medium.com Privacy Policy: https://policy.medium.com/medium-privacy-policy-f03bf92035c9 A few weeks ago I left an unfavorable review highlighting a number of bugs and design issues with the Medium app. However, with a recent update it seems that many of the issues have been resolved! Just wanted to say thank you to the developers and everyone involved in listening to and applying my feedback. These changes really have made my experience better and the quick turnaround was also impressive. Thank you so much 🙏🏻 If I could make one last suggestion, there doesn’t seem to be any direct way to give feedback or bug reports for this app outside of leaving a review on the App Store. I would’ve happily sent an email with my feedback and given the devs a chance to fix them before leaving a poor review. It’s also just easier and more efficient to communicate that way if you need more info or screenshots or anything like that. Setting up such a feedback channel can help protect your illustrious App Store rating and keep the business folks happy. Cheers again for building a great app and a great community and for valuing your user’s feedback 👍🏻 Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Pavan Kashyap Google's Achilles' Heel: Enabling Conversations Seoananthinfo SAP Helps Customers Map Their Road to the Intelligent Enterprise Rinku Prakash in iSchedul Impact of No Shows on Businesses and Economy & the Role of Technology on Mitigation Axial in Axial Axial S-1 Club — 908 Devices ْ Kerry Logistics picks up 50% in Indev Logistics for Rs.500-Cr Christine Russo Got 15 Minutes? Ethiopia COVID-19 Response Team in Africa COVID-19 Response Toolkit: The Blog 5 key steps in mobilizing COVID-19 response efforts in Africa Fintech Decoded in Fintech M&A Open Banking is rewiring the payments infrastructure About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 465 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Luke Burgis Follow Oct 8 · 4 min read · Member-only Your Personal Occam’s Razor How to rescue yourself and the people you love from the confusion and indistinction of faceless crowds. Image created with DALL-E for this article. “The true inner self must be drawn up like a jewel from the bottom of the sea, rescued from confusion, from indistinction, from immersion in the common, the nondescript, the trivial, the sordid, the evanescent.” — Thomas Merton -- -- 3 More from Luke Burgis Follow Author of “WANTING: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life.” Find more at read.lukeburgis.com Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Arpit Agrawal in Breathing Alive If you were to die in the next 365 days, would you do this? Renata Giarola The art of cultivating good envy Jessica Delfino in OneAndDoneMom What It’s Like To Be 42 Ryan E. Hart Achieve Your Most Baffling Goals Arunima Raghav in An Idea (by Ingenious Piece) A simple smile can do wonders. Nancy Peckenham in Crow’s Feet Our Stories Theresa Marie Peacemaker Travel Napper 24 IRL About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Luke Burgis 23K Followers Author of “WANTING: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life.” Find more at  read.lukeburgis.com Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Cotten.IO Tim Cotten Follow Oct 3 · 13 min read Save That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right?  Story time! In the spirit of #gamedev and inspired by the classic  UO postmortem video by Raph Koster, et al , I thought it’d be fun to share a few stories from the middle years of Ultima Online between my time at EA Redwood Shores and Mythic Fairfax. Today’s tale:  a technical teardown of burning down cheaters’ houses after finding a “criminal” ring of illegal item dupers. A Cheater’s House Burnt to the Ground in Luna, Ultima Online  (2008) Duping: UO’s Zero-Day Exploit When Ultima Online first launched we, the players, found some bugs. By some, I mean,  a lot . And the most valuable, diabolical, worth-building-a-secret-web-forum-to-trade-them sort of bug was:  duping . Being able to duplicate an item, or better,  a bag full of items , was the most advantageous exploit possible in the game. Better than speed-hacking, better than direct damage passthrough — even better than pre-lockdown home invasions. Snidely Whiplash: Notorious UO Gold Duper Some of the beta testers had a secret. Not all of us, of course, but there were certain seedy elements of the beta testing crowd that, rather than follow the virtue of Honesty, chose to hoard their knowledge of exploits rather than report them to the development team. Once UO’s beta ended and the game launched, well, suddenly the economy was hit by a wave of item duping. What was this “carefully guarded” exploit? Abusing areaserv boundaries. Rubberbanding For Fun and Profit I still remember the first time I saw it for myself. It was 1997 and I was running around north of the orc encampment near the town of Cove when I saw some randos doing the weirdest thing ever: they were running back and forth over this annoyingly laggy patch of the game map while dropping little chests on the ground. Now, I knew this particular area as being… the  worst . You see, there was this truly annoying part of the map on that dirt path between the mountains and the orc fortress that was pretty unresponsive and jerky when you walked over it. In fact, if you  *ran*  across it you might get “rubberbanded” — finding yourself losing a few seconds of gameplay time as you bounced back to a previous position before the server “caught up.” (Remind me to tell you all about UO’s server/client interpolation and tick-rate someday!) This was especially bad if a monster, like an inconveniently placed Orc Captain directly south of you, was chasing you and whacked you to death during your pathetically laggy attempt to flee. Imagine my surprise when these two players started excitedly yelling to each other in text (which floated over their heads) that “it worked! omgz!” Yup, they had managed to, as they excitedly bragged, figure out a trick to drop a chest on one side of the “laggy patch” while trying to pick-it-up/hand-it-over to the other player as they were both crossing from one side to the other and now each of them had a copy of the same chest: and its contents. Dupers! Guards! Guards! Seamless Server Boundaries are Hard What I had seen was an exploit based on the “areaserv” boundaries that split up the playable gameworld of Ultima Online. UO never did anything the easy way; after all, its first generation of designers were trying things — inventing entirely new things — that later online games would simply shake their heads at and say “nah, that’s too hard.” For instance: how to load-balance thousands of players in a huge 29,360,128 meter² game map in 1997? Instead of having different “zones” with loading screens or “long, foggy mountain passes”, the UO developers just invented rectangular, seamless “sub-maps” with a (fairly!) invisible method that just let you walk from one side to the other, all while things on the other side were still visible and updating in real-time. UO’s Trammel Areaserv Boundary Definitions  (2012) Thus, each game server (or “shard”) you played on was actually divided into “areaservs” and there was some incredibly well-written “mirror” code that handled communicating gamestate, object conditions, and events from one side of the border to the other. But crossing those borders as a player, sometimes, was noticeably laggy. Aside:  If you look at the areaserv map above you may notice that Britannia should’ve been divided up a bit more carefully so that areaserv boundaries didn’t cut through important/populated gameplay areas… look at poor Buccaneer’s Den:  there’s a reason those hidden, underground tunnels were never fun to PvP in . The areaservs were essentially copying your player character and sending over a bundled message between themselves containing all your info. Once a player crossed the boundary it destroyed the old copy of the player on the initial side. And it wasn’t just players: autonomous mobile objects (mobs) like monsters, animals, and NPCs could cross them as well. (Note: for future exploits those monsters and animals  also  had their own backpacks/inventories players could piggyback exploit attempts on; lots of llama drama.) Naturally, any given bug with the areaserv code represented the greatest probable source of “duping” exploits, especially when coupled with purposefully manipulations of a player’s gamestate before the server backup/shutdown sequence each morning. We Felt Like We Were Playing Whack-a-Mole And after I joined the UO team I learned a few things: The areaserv code is brilliant. It’s been patched and rewritten many times, but by my later years it had gotten pretty “smart” about the way it anticipated player state and pre-serialized objects before boundary transfers even happened. Yet, no matter how good the code became, we developers had introduced so much complexity into the game that sources of dupes abounded regardless — and more often than not they weren’t just areaserv issues anymore. It didn’t help that the game designers could actually write production-level code in Wombat (our own event-based scripting language) that had tons of wrappers for the C++ object management code. It really felt like we were constantly on the backfoot; we couldn’t be very proactive about dupes and depended on player reports & customer service to identify egregious exploits. Then, one day I had this weird idea. UO Didn’t Have a Database There are a couple of things you have to know about UO as it was in the mid-2000’s. Each shard ran a shutdown/backup sequence at a certain time in the early morning hours. (Great for not having to fix memory leaks!) The complete gamestate of each areaserv was dumped from memory into a big binary backup file — by the time I had joined the team they were approaching about 4gb in size. Once the areaservs finished the backups they shut down, restart, and went into standby while the “gameserv” did the same thing. You can think of the gameserv as a server dedicated to coordinating all of the areaservs and passing along logged in players to the right areaserv. The gameserv would shut down, restart, and then instruct each areaserv to load its last known-good backup. Each areaserv would load the binary backup and recreate the previously saved state of the game; it would  also  execute any triggers/hooks in the scripting code for objects/mobiles that said “Do X when the server loads.” [A bunch of other stuff here, including spawning new mobs or daily rares] The areaservs would report all was well and inform the gameserv, and the gameserv would re-announce itself to the login servers that it was available for play. #2 was the biggest problem with trying to find dupes: UO’s gamestate wasn’t in a “database” — there was no way to query for player possessions or objects to find illicit goods. It was 4gbs of binary blob; the data only made sense when loaded back into the game itself. I tried though: I *wanted* to read the binary blobs. I *wanted* to give Customer Service tools to find duped or stolen items. It just wasn’t possible with the tools of the time. Then I remembered #5, and it gave me an idea for a different line of attack. A Global Hash Registry Every dynamic object in UO— whether a mobile, player, or item — is capable of storing both data and scripts on themselves. Scripts don’t hold state once code execution ends, so we would store needed data in “objvars” and attach them to the same objects the scripts were attached to. The scripts themselves contained tons of “triggers” which were event handlers tied to game conditions. As I mentioned in #5 above, one of them had a name that went something like “beforeServerLoad” (heck if I remember the actual name) that specifically executed during the backup loading stage of the areaserv startup process. I thought: “What if we just *marked* the most valuable items in the game whenever they loaded from backup?” I went to the lead engineer,  Supreem , and asked for just one addition to the C++ code and an associated mapping to a “Wombat func” for it: a hashing function (hello crypto!). I wanted to make the gameserv store a running list of “marked” items during the areaserv loading process to identify dupes. A global hash registry. A Plan Unfolds: Invisible Dye Here’s how it worked: Every object in the game, when it loaded, had a hook for a generic “preload” script that would attach itself, execute, and detach itself before it allowed the object to execute any other scripts. This was really useful for cleaning up deployment errors if we did something wrong and it broke any objects in the game during a patch. I added a trigger in the preload script with an “beforeServerLoad” event that checked the item’s type: if it was in a predetermined list of the most expensive/rare types of items, it continued with the plan. If the item didn’t have a “tag” on it, it was created now: an objvar of “string” type that contained a hash of the current time, areaserv, and gameserv id (and some other unique data). This was a really long, random looking piece of text (larger than a 32bit integer) like “29bb546a415ff874e5129549fe8064249e8f1b2996fa2e7d52879d2ec24e06fd”. Once it had a tag (or if it already did), it sent a message to the gameserv (remember, there was only one of these per shard) and asked the gameserv to put it in a lookup registry. If the *tag* already existed in the registry then the item was permanently marked as “I AM DUPED” (again, with an objvar) in plaintext — because Customer Service reps in the god client could see it. The lookup registry only persisted until the areaservs all loaded up, then it cleared out to save memory. The idea was that if a valuable item (worthy of duping) had a unique hash stored on itself as an objvar, then the duping process — whatever it may be — would copy that same objvar’s value. Then there would be two unique objects both holding the same hash. The best time to check for this (in bulk) was during server loads, and that system marked all the objects with an “I AM DUPED” objvar. (Note: my memory may be fuzzy here, and we may have had to tie the script to the onPlayerLoad event as well; I just don’t remember if players were all loaded with the areaserv or whether they were fetched from the backup data on-demand). It was a lot like stamping the rare items with some sort of invisible ink that only fluoresced under certain conditions. So we released the updated code and let it run globally for a few weeks. And then the hunt began. Mwaha. Mwahaha. MWAHAHAHAHAHA! The Corporate Reaction Within a couple of weeks we realized the first phase had worked: we had found a ton of duped rare items, and they were mostly held by the same set of player accounts across multiple game servers. Despite our excitement, this is where we paused: what do we do now? We sat down to talk with Management, Customer Service, and our Community Manager. Management Our producer was stoked to explain what we’d accomplished to the studio general manager. I remember sitting in the meeting with a smile on my face, pleased as punch (as only an arrogant young gamedev can be), just to hear something I wasn’t expecting: “Mmm, I don’t think deleting them all [the duped items] is a good idea, you’ll hurt too many players.” I hadn’t considered that, actually. At all. I was too excited about having accomplished my long held goal to “catch some dupers.” I wanted to chafe and say something, maybe assert that he just  didn’t understand , but reined myself in and after the meeting I went back to the team and told them that we were forbidden from auto-deleting all the dupes. Customer Service So we went to the CS team for data. It was true. It would’ve been a terrible idea. The dupes spread so quickly once they were created that if we just deleted them all out from under all the players who had bought them (with their hard-earned gold) from the dupers we would be affecting a  significant  portion of the playerbase. Sure, some of them would be fine with the “morality” of our action — but on the scale of hundreds or thousands of affected players (per shard) we were just asking for the frustration to cause a wave of quiet quitting. I really shouldn’t have been surprised by this: our studio’s general manager has been running MMOs for a lot longer than I ever had. To make matters more complicated the Customer Service team started asking us hard questions, like: “Exactly how many duped  runic valorite hammers  should a person have before we ban them?” What online game developers open up with every patch. Wait, we were supposed to assign an arbitrary value on how many dupes being held by one person was suspicious? Oh. Oh boy. This was harder than code. It was community design, not just game design. Community Manager Thankfully, we had a level-headed community manager who was used to our over-exuberance. Honestly, they were just used to managing  me  whenever I got too passionate about something. “CS is going to ban them [the actual dupers] anyways. Why not make it an event?” was about how that conversation went. Well, I was the lead live events designer, so… we plotted. Fire! Heh Heh, Fire! We identified the dupers themselves and their storage depos: they had homes full of their duped items and NPC vendors selling them to the players. The “duping ring” stretched across multiple servers, comprised of distinct groups not necessarily working together. They had all evolved the same behaviors though: making tons of UO gold from selling dupes and then selling the UO gold on secondary markets for hard cash. So Adida and I wrote a script, that, once attached to a house, would: Delete the house and all of its contents. All of it. Instantly. Recursively. *poof* Spawn a bunch of immovable “housing rubble” in a predetermined rectangular area that fit the same dimensions the house existed in. It was colored dark black to look like it had soot all over it. Spawn a bunch of eternal “fire fields” amongst the rubble. Create a straw dummy labeled “An Effigy of a Traitor” to place in the middle of the burning rubble. Then, we chose a day, and struck. Customer Service mass banned the dupers on a timer, right before their associated server came online. Then we paused the gameserv/loginserv connection to those same servers and Adida and I ran around (teleported, really) to each housing location, attached the script, watched the fires erupt with joy, and moved on. We did this in batches of related servers so that each “duping ring” didn’t have time to notice they were banned and try to log in on alt-accounts to empty their houses before we could get to them The Community Reacts Confusion! Chaos! Joy! Laughter! Another House Successfully Burnt to the Ground — With Particle Effects Discussion threads popped up on Stratics and  MMORPG.com  almost instantly, full of wonderings and guesses — and a few false suggestions like that a CS employee had been caught up in the banning (false!). Well That’s Neat, But Don’t Do It Again Dozens of homes had been destroyed across the entire multiverse of Ultima Online, and the flames licking the sooty rubble were a visible testimony to our team’s determination to deal with cheaters. It felt fantastic! And we were told not to do it again. Lol. We took some flak for doing something so daringly public to cheating players — even though we made sure not to  identify  them to the other players directly — but still just barely skated by with upper-upper-upper management. Customer Service was instructed to use their discretion to deal with “I AM DUPED” items from then on, and honestly, by now I don’t know if anyone even remembers that the system exists (if it even does). Some Lessons Learned (Satoshi Surprise?) Readers who’ve been exposed to NFTs might notice the eerie resemblance of us marking these rare items (which were non-fungible!) with unique hashes to how blockchain-based Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) work today. Ironically, one thing that our method didn’t work on was *stacks* of objects (fungible items like gold coins). But  Satoshi Nakamoto solved that problem too! The first Bitcoin paper describes a perfect method (online or offline) for validating timestamped events like currency creation . It would’ve helped prevent dupes *and* ensured internal bad actors (with item creation powers) couldn’t just generate a bunch of gold to sell outside the game. Not that I’m saying MMOs need blockchains; but it turns out Proof-of-Work ledger technology had a use case here! (No wonder  Amazon now offers a similar service: QLDB ). Finally, one of the biggest things we learned was having to deal with the economics *after* the fire: especially when players wanted to compete for the now available, very  premium , housing spots. But that’s another story. About the Author Tim “Draconi” Cotten  was the lead game designer of Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss, and when he’s not writing up stories from the wild days of online gaming is working on applying all those hard-won lessons to Metaverse design. Follow him on Twitter  for more Ultima related stories! -- -- 4 More from Cotten.IO Follow Technology - established, emerging, disruptive, speculative Read more from    Cotten.IO Recommended from Medium Rowan Kaiser How To Play Mass Effect — Start With ME2 Sammie Aran Sammie’s Opinion — SSBU: Steve and Minecraft! Sleeping Donut in Donut Lab Donut Punks was released for iOS and got downloaded over 1 million times! THEWEB BAZAR HOW CAN MAKE A GAME DEVELOPER Reynolds Sandbox in The Reynolds Sandbox Media Tips: Drew Scanlon, Clothmapping the World Through Games Draconid in Dota Observatory MDL Chengdu Major Data Analysis Platunovnikita PlanetQuest is a unique exploration, survival and discovery game. Alice Mathew Top 5 Game Development Software About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Tim Cotten 691 Followers Founder of Scrypted Inc: Building interactive digital assets for the Metaverse. < tim@cotten.io > @cottenio Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Download our app so you can read, write, and publish wherever you are. App Support Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Michael Beausoleil Follow Oct 7 · 7 min read · Member-only The Modern Smartphone Started as a Sidekick Mobile phones in the early 2000s took few forms. Most casual users had flip phones, and businesspeople often had PDAs like Blackberrys. Then, iPhone came into existence and accelerated the world toward smartphones. The  Motorola Razr  was cool and the Blackberry was practical, but there was one phone that tried to break the mold and become both: The T-Mobile Sidekick. And for a moment in time, it did just that. All of the  it-celebrities  had one, and the phone did much more than talk and text. -- -- More from Michael Beausoleil Follow User Analytics | Digital & Brand Marketing | Productivity … hoping to explore topics that interest me and find others with similar passions Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Raven Sinclair Help! They Abducted My… iPhone Ryan Banfill America Hoodwinked? Global Challenges Foundation How will disruptive technologies impact global governance? An expert survey Shangping Liu What Are Neodymium Magnets? Micromobility Report New R&D Hub Central to Beam Expansion in Australia Rapiergroup Events 2050: The future of events and exhibitions matchloading Hp laptop elan touchpad driver windows 10 Dave Gershgorn in OneZero Banjo Suspends All Operations in Utah Following OneZero Investigation About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Michael Beausoleil 514 Followers User Analytics | Digital & Brand Marketing | Productivity … hoping to explore topics that interest me and find others with similar passions Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Brett Johnson Open The Mic Newsletter — Podcast News Jbetancourt Fake News Major Writing Assignment Rani Yadav-Ranjan Fake news is not new! Ajit Pai The Need for Speed Aya Schechner CEO Snippets: David Walmsley, Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail Andrey Abasin Epoch Media Casts Wider Net to Spread Its Message Online Kathryn Fraser The Symbol of Survival: The Media Impact on Kalief Browder Ameera AlSaid in Doha News Will Qatar’s print media survive COVID-19? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 462 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 12 min read Medium Terms of Service Effective: September 1, 2020 You can see our previous Terms  here . Thanks for using Medium. Our mission is to deepen people’s understanding of the world and spread ideas that matter. These Terms of Service (“ Terms ”) apply to your access to and use of the websites, mobile applications and other online products and services (collectively, the “ Services ”) provided by A Medium Corporation (“ Medium ” or “ we ”).  By clicking your consent (e.g. “Continue,” “Sign-in,” or “Sign-up,”) or by using our Services, you agree to these Terms, including the mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver in the Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration Section. Our  Privacy Policy  explains how we collect and use your information while our  Rules  outline your responsibilities when using our Services. By using our Services, you’re agreeing to be bound by these Terms and our Rules. Please see our  Privacy Policy  for information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you. If you have any questions about these Terms or our Services, please contact us at  legal@medium.com . Your Account and Responsibilities You’re responsible for your use of the Services and any content you provide, including compliance with applicable laws. Content on the Services may be protected by others’ intellectual property rights. Please don’t copy, upload, download, or share content unless you have the right to do so. Your use of the Services must comply with our Rules. You may need to register for an account to access some or all of our Services. Help us keep your account protected. Safeguard your password to the account, and keep your account information current. We recommend that you do not share your password with others. If you’re accepting these Terms and using the Services on behalf of someone else (such as another person or entity), you represent that you’re authorized to do so, and in that case the words “you” or “your” in these Terms include that other person or entity. To use our Services, you must be at least 13 years old. If you use the Services to access, collect, or use personal information about other Medium users (“Personal Information”), you agree to do so in compliance with applicable laws. You further agree not to sell any Personal Information, where the term “sell” has the meaning given to it under applicable laws. For Personal Information you provide to us (e.g. as a Newsletter Editor), you represent and warrant that you have lawfully collected the Personal Information and that you or a third party has provided all required notices and collected all required consents before collecting the Personal Information. You further represent and warrant that Medium’s use of such Personal Information in accordance with the purposes for which you provided us the Personal Information will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) and will not cause us to violate any applicable laws. User Content on the Services Medium may review your conduct and content for compliance with these Terms and our Rules, and reserves the right to remove any violating content. Medium reserves the right to delete or disable content alleged to be infringing the intellectual property rights of others, and to terminate accounts of repeat infringers. We respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement if they comply with the law; please report such notices using our  Copyright Policy . Rights and Ownership You retain your rights to any content you submit, post or display on or through the Services.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, by submitting, posting, or displaying content on or through the Services, you grant Medium a nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your content in all media formats and distribution methods now known or later developed on the Services. Medium needs this license because you own your content and Medium therefore can’t display it across its various surfaces (i.e., mobile, web) without your permission. This type of license also is needed to distribute your content across our Services. For example, you post a story on Medium. It is reproduced as versions on both our website and app, and distributed to multiple places within Medium, such as the homepage or reading lists. A modification might be that we show a snippet of your work (and not the full post) in a preview, with attribution to you. A derivative work might be a list of top authors or quotes on Medium that uses portions of your content, again with full attribution. This license applies to our Services only, and does not grant us any permissions outside of our Services. So long as you comply with these Terms, Medium gives you a limited, personal, non-exclusive, and non-assignable license to access and use our Services. The Services are protected by copyright, trademark, and other US and foreign laws. These Terms don’t grant you any right, title or interest in the Services, other users’ content on the Services, or Medium trademarks, logos or other brand features. Separate and apart from the content you submit, post or display on our Services, we welcome feedback, including any comments, ideas and suggestions you have about our Services. We may use this feedback for any purpose, in our sole discretion, without any obligation to you. We may treat feedback as nonconfidential. We may stop providing the Services or any of its features within our sole discretion. We also retain the right to create limits on use and storage and may remove or limit content distribution on the Services. Termination You’re free to stop using our Services at any time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your access to the Services with or without notice. Transfer and Processing Data In order for us to provide our Services, you agree that we may process, transfer and store information about you in the US and other countries, where you may not have the same rights and protections as you do under local law. Indemnification To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you will indemnify, defend and hold harmless Medium, and our officers, directors, agents, partners and employees (individually and collectively, the  “Medium Parties” ) from and against any losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, expenses or costs ( “Claims” ) arising out of or related to your violation, misappropriation or infringement of any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) or your violation of the law. You agree to promptly notify Medium Parties of any third-party Claims, cooperate with Medium Parties in defending such Claims and pay all fees, costs and expenses associated with defending such Claims (including attorneys’ fees). You also agree that the Medium Parties will have control of the defense or settlement, at Medium’s sole option, of any third-party Claims. Disclaimers — Service is “As Is” Medium aims to give you great Services but there are some things we can’t guarantee. Your use of our Services is at your sole risk. You understand that our Services and any content posted or shared by users on the Services are provided “as is” and “as available” without warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title, and non-infringement. In addition, Medium doesn’t represent or warrant that our Services are accurate, complete, reliable, current or error-free. No advice or information obtained from Medium or through the Services will create any warranty or representation not expressly made in this paragraph. Medium may provide information about third-party products, services, activities or events, or we may allow third parties to make their content and information available on or through our Services (collectively, “ Third-Party Content ”). We do not control or endorse, and we make no representations or warranties regarding, any Third-Party Content. You access and use Third-Party Content at your own risk. Some locations don’t allow the disclaimers in this paragraph and so they might not apply to you. Limitation of Liability We don’t exclude or limit our liability to you where it would be illegal to do so; this includes any liability for the gross negligence, fraud or intentional misconduct of Medium or the other Medium Parties in providing the Services. In countries where the following types of exclusions aren’t allowed, we’re responsible to you only for losses and damages that are a reasonably foreseeable result of our failure to use reasonable care and skill or our breach of our contract with you. This paragraph doesn’t affect consumer rights that can’t be waived or limited by any contract or agreement. In countries where exclusions or limitations of liability are allowed, Medium and Medium Parties won’t be liable for: (a)   Any indirect, consequential, exemplary, incidental, punitive, or special damages, or any loss of use, data or profits, under any legal theory, even if Medium or the other Medium Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages. (b)   Other than for the types of liability we can’t limit by law (as described in this section), we limit the total liability of Medium and the other Medium Parties for any claim arising out of or relating to these Terms or our Services, regardless of the form of the action, to the greater of $50.00 USD or the amount paid by you to use our Services. Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration We want to address your concerns without needing a formal legal case. Before filing a claim against Medium, you agree to contact us and attempt to resolve the claim informally by sending a written notice of your claim by email at legal@medium.com or by certified mail addressed to A Medium Corporation, P.O. Box 602, San Francisco, CA 94104. The notice must (a) include your name, residence address, email address, and telephone number; (b) describe the nature and basis of the claim; and (c) set forth the specific relief sought. Our notice to you will be sent to the email address associated with your online account and will contain the information described above. If we can’t resolve matters within thirty (30) days after any notice is sent, either party may initiate a formal proceeding. Please read the following section carefully because it requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with Medium and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us, unless you opt out of arbitration by following the instructions set forth below. No class or representative actions or arbitrations are allowed under this arbitration provision. In addition, arbitration precludes you from suing in court or having a jury trial. (a)  No Representative Actions. You and Medium agree that any dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services is personal to you and Medium and that any dispute will be resolved solely through individual action, and will not be brought as a class arbitration, class action or any other type of representative proceeding. (b)  Arbitration of Disputes.  Except for small claims disputes in which you or Medium seeks to bring an individual action in small claims court located in the county where you reside or disputes in which you or Medium seeks injunctive or other equitable relief for the alleged infringement or misappropriation of intellectual property,  you and Medium waive your rights to a jury trial and to have any other dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services, including claims related to privacy and data security, (collectively, “ Disputes ”) resolved in court . All Disputes submitted to JAMS will be resolved through confidential, binding arbitration before one arbitrator. Arbitration proceedings will be held in San Francisco, California unless you’re a consumer, in which case you may elect to hold the arbitration in your county of residence. For purposes of this section a “ consumer ” means a person using the Services for personal, family or household purposes. You and Medium agree that Disputes will be held in accordance with the JAMS Streamlined Arbitration Rules and Procedures (“ JAMS Rules ”). The most recent version of the JAMS Rules are available on the  JAMS website  and are incorporated into these Terms by reference. You either acknowledge and agree that you have read and understand the JAMS Rules or waive your opportunity to read the JAMS Rules and waive any claim that the JAMS Rules are unfair or should not apply for any reason. (c) You and Medium agree that these Terms affect interstate commerce and that the enforceability of this section will be substantively and procedurally governed by the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1,  et seq . (the “ FAA ”), to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. As limited by the FAA, these Terms and the JAMS Rules, the arbitrator will have exclusive authority to make all procedural and substantive decisions regarding any Dispute and to grant any remedy that would otherwise be available in court, including the power to determine the question of arbitrability. The arbitrator may conduct only an individual arbitration and may not consolidate more than one individual’s claims, preside over any type of class or representative proceeding or preside over any proceeding involving more than one individual. (d) The arbitration will allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the Dispute. The arbitrator, Medium, and you will maintain the confidentiality of any arbitration proceedings, judgments and awards, including information gathered, prepared and presented for purposes of the arbitration or related to the Dispute(s) therein. The arbitrator will have the authority to make appropriate rulings to safeguard confidentiality, unless the law provides to the contrary. The duty of confidentiality doesn’t apply to the extent that disclosure is necessary to prepare for or conduct the arbitration hearing on the merits, in connection with a court application for a preliminary remedy, or in connection with a judicial challenge to an arbitration award or its enforcement, or to the extent that disclosure is otherwise required by law or judicial decision. (e) You and Medium agree that for any arbitration you initiate, you will pay the filing fee (up to a maximum of $250 if you are a consumer), and Medium will pay the remaining JAMS fees and costs. For any arbitration initiated by Medium, Medium will pay all JAMS fees and costs. You and Medium agree that the state or federal courts of the State of California and the United States sitting in San Francisco, California have exclusive jurisdiction over any appeals and the enforcement of an arbitration award. (f)  Any Dispute must be filed within one year after the relevant claim arose; otherwise, the Dispute is permanently barred, which means that you and Medium will not have the right to assert the claim. (g)  You have the right to opt out of binding arbitration within 30 days of the date you first accepted the terms of this section by sending an email of your request to  yourfriends@medium.com . In order to be effective, the opt-out notice must include your full name and address and clearly indicate your intent to opt out of binding arbitration. By opting out of binding arbitration, you are agreeing to resolve Disputes in accordance with the next section regarding “Governing Law and Venue.” (h) If any portion of this section is found to be unenforceable or unlawful for any reason, (1) the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall be severed from these Terms; (2) severance of the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall have no impact whatsoever on the remainder of this section or the parties’ ability to compel arbitration of any remaining claims on an individual basis pursuant to this section; and (3) to the extent that any claims must therefore proceed on a class, collective, consolidated, or representative basis, such claims must be litigated in a civil court of competent jurisdiction and not in arbitration, and the parties agree that litigation of those claims shall be stayed pending the outcome of any individual claims in arbitration. Further, if any part of this section is found to prohibit an individual claim seeking public injunctive relief, that provision will have no effect to the extent such relief is allowed to be sought out of arbitration, and the remainder of this section will be enforceable. Governing Law and Venue These Terms and any dispute that arises between you and Medium will be governed by California law except for its conflict of law principles. Any dispute between the parties that’s not subject to arbitration or can’t be heard in small claims court will be resolved in the state or federal courts of California and the United States, respectively, sitting in San Francisco, California. Some countries have laws that require agreements to be governed by the local laws of the consumer’s country. This paragraph doesn’t override those laws. Amendments We may make changes to these Terms from time to time. If we make changes, we’ll provide you with notice of them by sending an email to the email address associated with your account, offering an in-product notification, or updating the date at the top of these Terms. Unless we say otherwise in our notice, the amended Terms will be effective immediately, and your continued use of our Services after we provide such notice will confirm your acceptance of the changes. If you don’t agree to the amended Terms, you must stop using our Services. Severability If any provision or part of a provision of these Terms is unlawful, void or unenforceable, that provision or part of the provision is deemed severable from these Terms and does not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Miscellaneous Medium’s failure to exercise or enforce any right or provision of these Terms will not operate as a waiver of such right or provision. These Terms, and the terms and policies listed in the Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You Section, reflect the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior agreements, statements and understandings of the parties. The section titles in these Terms are for convenience only and have no legal or contractual effect. Use of the word “including” will be interpreted to mean “including without limitation.” Except as otherwise provided herein, these Terms are intended solely for the benefit of the parties and are not intended to confer third-party beneficiary rights upon any other person or entity. You agree that communications and transactions between us may be conducted electronically. Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You -  Medium Rules -  Partner Program Terms -  Membership Terms of Service -  Username Policy -  Custom Domains Terms of Service -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium SheHacksPurple in DevOps Dudes Security is Everybody’s Job — Part 1 — DevSecOps SkyNet Tools Vulnnr — Vulnerability Scanner & Auto Exploiter itSynergy 5 Cybersecurity Misconceptions That Need to Be Debunked phbits OpenSSL Root Certificate Authority Afolic Setting up Burpsuite for your web penetration testing Shashwat Singh Critical Controls to Secure OpenSSH Installation Auditchain AUDITCHAIN ANNOUNCES PHASE 2 BOUNTY CAMPAIGN! Cyrex Security Explained: Fear the Peer-to-Peer About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable First off I love what Medium is doing here. From a consumer of interesting writing, this is exactly what I want; no ads and very often articles that are interesting to me. The articles surfaced are improving as I use the service which is a good sign that what these people are doing with my usage is working. The app on the other hand has some nagging issues for those who use an iPad in landscape or simply prefer landscape mode regardless of device. This app is clearly designed to be used in portrait mode... yes it works in landscape but the layout doesn't really fit the screen most of the time, and has huge white margins on both sides. It's as if the designers decided rather than reflow the text, we'll just keep the same text width and add huge margins on the sides. Large pictures that are embedded within articles tend to be cut off when in landscape, but are sized nicely to fit within the screen in portrait. Even worse, as of the last update the app shows a blank white screen when switching from portrait to landscape. I know that this may come off as a bit of a quibble, and it is, but a large iPad Pro just isn't very comfortable in portrait, and anything with videos really should be in landscape anyway. Besides, the app did pester me for a review, so here you go... All in all, a great service and an app that is more than usable, just not 5 starts great... yet. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write George Dillard Follow Oct 7 · 7 min read · Member-only Why are Some of the Most Important Prices Secret? End price opacity! Photo by  Brett Jordan  on  Unsplash I have always hated buying cars. You have to go into the dealership, endure a commissioned salesman’s manipulative mind games, and then haggle over the price. It always feels like the system is designed to make it easier for the dealer to screw me over, and I have been screwed over. The salesman knows more than I do… -- -- 3 More from George Dillard Follow Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also: worldhistoryfacts.com. Buy me a beverage: https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Wendie Sun in The Post-Grad Survival Guide Sort Out Your Personal Finance with the Barefoot Steps Tanay Jaipuria The Power of Defaults Veverob Veve Market Fomo — How To Navigate It. Feciat2115 Does an auto loan build good credit? Jari Roomer in Making of a Millionaire This Book Showed Me Financial Independence Is Much Closer Than I Expected Quithe2649 I need the web address for free credit reports. Lane Kawaoka Oct 2020 Monthly Market Update Anesu Ndlovu Can I trust you? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started George Dillard 1.8K Followers Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also:  worldhistoryfacts.com . Buy me a beverage:  https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

age - Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age.  Learn More Age Rating

end - Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Go Into The Story Scott Myers Follow Oct 6 · 9 min read · Member-only Save Tarantino, Sorkin, and Dialogue as Purpose Analysis of long dialogue-centric scenes in  The Social Network  and  Pulp Fiction  reveals that underneath the entertaining conversations lies their respective narrative function: to move the plot forward. Quentin Tarantino and Aaron Sorkin In a recent online class I taught on dialogue, the writers taking the course and I had some really enlightening discussions including this one about two masters in this arena: Aaron Sorkin and Quentin Tarantino. Both of them are known for the occasional long dialogue-laden scene and we might be tempted to interpret these as just being about entertainment. Read this excerpt from my first lecture which precipitated the online conversation, considering the screenwriting principle Dialogue = Purpose. The first 8+ pages of  The Social Network  script would appear to be the very epitome of  purposelessness . Apart from introducing two key characters — Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) and Erica (Rooney Mara) — the dialogue zigs and zags from one topic to the next, a confused quilt of references and observations. Here is a list of topics in the scene: People with genius IQs in China How to “distinguish yourself” amongst people who got 1600 on SAT’s A Capella choir, rowing crew, inventing a “25 dollar PC” Final club World class athletes rowing crew How girls like cowboys Exclusivity Various final clubs at Harvard with the Porc being the “best of the best” Theodore Roosevelt Mark’s friend Eduardo made $300,000 betting on oil futures Predicting weather and the price of heating oil Spat about Erica asking which final club is the “easiest to get into” Spat about Erica calling it “finals” club Spat about Erica calling Mark “obsessed,” he says he’s “motivated” Mark thinks Erica speaks in “code” Mark says “I need to do something substantial” to get the “attention” of the clubs Mark: “Because they’re exclusive. And fun and they lead to a better life.” Mark: “You should be a lot more supportive,” benefits for her if he was in a club She tells him she is no longer his girlfriend Mark says Erica used to sleep with the door guy of the club they’re drinking in Erica gets angry and says she’s leaving Mark tries to apologize Erica says dating Mark is “exhausting” Mark disparages B.U. (Boston University) where Erica goes to college Erica delivers two “stingers” and leaves him 8 plus pages. 111 sides of dialogue. Where is the purpose in this scene? Dialogue conveys exposition : If we define exposition as information, data, and backstory, we can see how Sorkin laces a lot of it into these pages: Information: Mark attends Harvard; Erica attends B.U.; the Porcellian is the most exclusive final club at Harvard; Teddy Roosevelt was a Porc. Data: The number of geniuses in China; Eduardo made $300K last year. Backstory: Mark got 1600 on his SAT; Mark and Erica have been romantically involved; Mark thinks Erica used to sleep with the door guy. This exposition is key in establishing the story’s setting (contemporary Harvard) and some of the basics of the Protagonist (Mark) and Attractor (Erica) characters. Dialogue reveals a character’s inner life : Through text and subtext, Sorkin conveys important aspects of both Mark and Erica’s thoughts and feelings: Mark: He is looking to distinguish himself; he feels pressure to do “something substantial” with his life; his reaction to Erica’s comment about the easiest final club shows he has personal insecurities; he thinks she should be more supportive of his desire to join a final club; Mark is dismissive of B.U. as an academic institution; his goal is a “better life.” Erica: She thinks Mark is “obsessed” with final clubs; she has a difficult time following Mark’s way of thinking and talking; she gets angry at Mark’s insensitivity (i.e., door guy accusation, derision of B.U. and by extension her own intellect); she finds being with Mark “exhausting.” The purpose of this facet of the scene’s dialogue is to go beyond exposition and provide readers a deeper insight into the inner workings of these two pivotal characters. Dialogue distinguishes one character from another : In what they say and how they say it, Sorkin creates a clear sense of Mark and Erica’s individual identities: Mark: He is extremely, almost excessively verbal; he is kinetic, his ideas spewing forth; he carries on his own internal conversation that often loses Erica; he is essentially humorless. Erica: Less intelligent, but smarter socially; she tries to use humor to make points (“You don’t care if side effects may include  blindness , okay, just do it,” “What part of Long Island are you from — England”); she is primarily reactive to him; she does not waffle in her decision to break up with him. There is also this subtle distinction between them. Whereas Erica is actually hurt by Mark’s derisive comments, unintentional though they may be, when Erica dumps him, Mark doesn’t feel distress so much as shock, as if it is unfathomable she would have any reason to terminate their relationship. At this level of purpose, Sorkin not only distinguishes the two characters in terms of the text of their words, but also the subtext, the deeper emotional meaning  under  their words. Dialogue moves the plot forward : Within the realm of a story universe, perhaps the single most important purpose of dialogue is to advance the plot. On the surface this extended exchange between these two characters in  The Social Network  seems precisely like a conversation with little or no substantive part to play in terms of the narrative. A closer examination reveals the scene moves the plot ahead in two ways: (1) The scene itself has a clear Beginning, Middle and End; (2) Its end point is a critical event that sets into motion everything else that follows in the plot. Scene structure: The Beginning of the scene revolves around establishing Mark’s powerful desire to get into a final club. The Middle involves Erica calling into question Mark’s obsession while Mark challenges her to support him, and in so doing provides one dismissive comment toward her after another. The Ending centers on Erica breaking up with Mark. Point of the scene: It’s the break-up and specifically Erica’s final lines to Mark as she leaves: Here is the scene from the movie: The point of the scene is two-fold: (1) Erica breaks up with Mark. (2) Erica’s parting shot becomes a verbal talisman to inspire Mark to make something of himself and join a final club. The scene’s ending dialogue caps off this key purpose of the scene tied to the plot. Mark Walker, one of the writers in the class, responded with this: I think that is a key observation that those new to screenwriting (like myself) need to get into their heads. I think, when I started out, I was probably of the mind that dialogue wasn’t as important as the scene description and visual “delivery” of the film. As I have wised up a bit (there is still a lot of room for further improvement) from reading books and blogs, and the SMC (Screenwriting Master Class), it has become clearer just how powerful good dialogue can be, let alone great dialogue. it is interesting to watch films knowing this and think about how the dialogue works so well. Scott’s example clearly shows this, and how it is an art to make it look like conversation when it actually isn’t. To throw all that stuff at you that you probably don’t recognize as character building and exposition until later in the movie when you get those call-backs that relate to some of that conversation and it all clicks into place, is a vital skill. I would compare this to Tarantino introducing Jules and Vincent as they approach the building where the guys with Marcellus’ brief case are waiting. An excerpt: Here’s the scene from the movie: I think we get all four of Scott’s purposes in that conversation which, on the surface of it, sounds like two guys just chewing the fat about work and shit. But we hear about (amongst everything else): Vincent being in Amsterdam — he has been away and missed some stuff We get banter about their weapons which tells us they are gangsters/hitmen….dangerous Jules is catching him up about the guy that gave Mia foot massage This tells us their boss is a hard man not to be messed with We hear Vincent has been asked to “take her out” while Marcellus is away — setting up the next part of the story. Jules concern in relation to foot massages tells us more about their boss and theor perception of him. The dialogue tells us about the suitcase Macguffin. We get to learn that Vincent and Jules are very different — Jules is respectful and more refined than Vincent who is a little more brash — all found from a conversation about giving foot massages We get everything; exposition, inner life of the characters, we learn how they are different from each other and plot moves forward with regards the macguffin. By the time we are ready to kick the door down we know exactly who these two guys are, what they do for a living and who they work for, as well as a bit about their past and what is in store for them (or at least Vincent) in the next chapter. None of the dialogue is “wasted” or “filler” — like everything else with screenwriting — if it doesn’t serve the story, does it need to be cut? That example you cite from  Pulp Fiction  works as entertainment straight-out, thus if we don’t look closer, we may assume it’s just QT riffing with dialogue, pure and simple. But if we  do  examine the content, we see, as you pointed out so well with your analysis, Mark, that there is a purpose to the conversation; in fact,  several  of them, in effect setting up a few important subplots. A comparison of this scene and the opening to  The Social Network  reveals that everything hangs on the dialogue’s tie-in to and advancement of the plot. In fact, if one were to boil down each scene to the single most important contribution each makes to the plot, it’s right there: Pulp Fiction : To establish the upcoming “date” Vincent is going to have with Mia and the pressure he will be under to handle that properly re Marcellus and his temper. That sets everything in that subplot into motion including Vincent scoring the heroin as a way of taking the edge of the date which leads to Mia overdosing on it (thinking it’s cocaine), and so forth. The Social Network : The breakup of Mark and Erica which, as the denouement shows [even though the entirety of their subplot is only four or five beats], provides one huge motivation on Mark’s part to succeed: To prove he has worth in response to her rejection of him. Takeaway: Dialogue = Purpose. This is true even if you go off on a riff à la Tarantino and Sorkin. Tie the dialogue to those four markers, but most especially to the advancement of the plot. I don’t care how good you are with dialogue, if you write a scene in which the dialogue has zero impact on the plot, you should consider reshaping the scene to make it relevant to the plot or drop the scene entirely as being extraneous. What are your thoughts about how important dialogue is to plot? Comment Archive -- -- 1 More from Go Into The Story Follow Official Screenwriting Blog of The Black List Read more from    Go Into The Story Recommended from Medium Robert Ralph in New Writers Welcome How to add a signature file Ilana Quinn in Writers’ Blokke How to Research for Historical Fiction Sakshi Udavant (Luna) in The Brave Writer A Client Just Rejected My Work And I Have Never Been Happier Ellie Jacobson Get Your Write On: Setting Yourself Up for NaNoWriMo Success Sherry McGuinn in Rogues’ Gallery Men, Got a Problem With the Ladies? Jessica A in The Book Mechanic 4 Personal Qualities All Successful Writers Share Rosa de Saron C. in Publishing Well Is Writing Long Form Really Worth It Scott A. Gese in Success in Mind Medium: Are You Sure You Want to Take This Ride? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Scott Myers 35K Followers Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium is an open platform where over 100 million readers come to find insightful and dynamic thinking. Here, expert and undiscovered voices alike dive into the heart of any topic and bring new ideas to the surface. Use the Medium app to easily find and follow the writers and publications that matter to you, and keep up on their latest posts. Explore personalized, ad-free recommendations, and dive deeper on just about any topic. Bookmark posts for later, highlight passages that resonate, and join the conversation on the stories you read. Receive unlimited access to all Medium stories and support great writing by becoming a member for $5/month or $50/year, and enjoy your first month free. Your Medium membership will automatically renew each month or each year, and you will be charged $4.99 or $49.99 through your iTunes account within 24-hours prior to the end of the current monthly or yearly cycle. You can turn off auto-renew at any time from your iTunes account settings up until 24-hours before the end of the current period, but refunds will not be provided for any unused portion of the term. Please visit our Membership Terms of Service for more information: https://me.dm/subscription-terms Medium Terms of Service: https://policy.medium.com/medium-terms-of-service-9db0094a1e0f Questions? Feedback? To get help, visit https://help.medium.com Privacy Policy: https://policy.medium.com/medium-privacy-policy-f03bf92035c9 Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Pavan Kashyap Google's Achilles' Heel: Enabling Conversations Seoananthinfo SAP Helps Customers Map Their Road to the Intelligent Enterprise Rinku Prakash in iSchedul Impact of No Shows on Businesses and Economy & the Role of Technology on Mitigation Axial in Axial Axial S-1 Club — 908 Devices ْ Kerry Logistics picks up 50% in Indev Logistics for Rs.500-Cr Christine Russo Got 15 Minutes? Ethiopia COVID-19 Response Team in Africa COVID-19 Response Toolkit: The Blog 5 key steps in mobilizing COVID-19 response efforts in Africa Fintech Decoded in Fintech M&A Open Banking is rewiring the payments infrastructure About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 465 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium Front End Uptime Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Brett Johnson Open The Mic Newsletter — Podcast News Jbetancourt Fake News Major Writing Assignment Rani Yadav-Ranjan Fake news is not new! Ajit Pai The Need for Speed Aya Schechner CEO Snippets: David Walmsley, Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail Andrey Abasin Epoch Media Casts Wider Net to Spread Its Message Online Kathryn Fraser The Symbol of Survival: The Media Impact on Kalief Browder Ameera AlSaid in Doha News Will Qatar’s print media survive COVID-19? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 462 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write George Dillard Follow Oct 7 · 7 min read · Member-only Why are Some of the Most Important Prices Secret? End price opacity! Photo by  Brett Jordan  on  Unsplash I have always hated buying cars. You have to go into the dealership, endure a commissioned salesman’s manipulative mind games, and then haggle over the price. It always feels like the system is designed to make it easier for the dealer to screw me over, and I have been screwed over. The salesman knows more than I do… -- -- 3 More from George Dillard Follow Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also: worldhistoryfacts.com. Buy me a beverage: https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Wendie Sun in The Post-Grad Survival Guide Sort Out Your Personal Finance with the Barefoot Steps Tanay Jaipuria The Power of Defaults Veverob Veve Market Fomo — How To Navigate It. Feciat2115 Does an auto loan build good credit? Jari Roomer in Making of a Millionaire This Book Showed Me Financial Independence Is Much Closer Than I Expected Quithe2649 I need the web address for free credit reports. Lane Kawaoka Oct 2020 Monthly Market Update Anesu Ndlovu Can I trust you? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started George Dillard 1.8K Followers Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also:  worldhistoryfacts.com . Buy me a beverage:  https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Image Front End Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. For every post of congratulations to the Figma team for having their years of hard work pay off, there were a dozen more lamenting what Adobe will do to their favorite… Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Image Front End Uptime Medium Front End

able - Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Link your account to Twitter so your network can find and follow you on Medium. You'll also be able to discover other writers you already follow on Twitter.  Learn more. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Cotten.IO Tim Cotten Follow Oct 3 · 13 min read Save That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right?  Story time! In the spirit of #gamedev and inspired by the classic  UO postmortem video by Raph Koster, et al , I thought it’d be fun to share a few stories from the middle years of Ultima Online between my time at EA Redwood Shores and Mythic Fairfax. Today’s tale:  a technical teardown of burning down cheaters’ houses after finding a “criminal” ring of illegal item dupers. A Cheater’s House Burnt to the Ground in Luna, Ultima Online  (2008) Duping: UO’s Zero-Day Exploit When Ultima Online first launched we, the players, found some bugs. By some, I mean,  a lot . And the most valuable, diabolical, worth-building-a-secret-web-forum-to-trade-them sort of bug was:  duping . Being able to duplicate an item, or better,  a bag full of items , was the most advantageous exploit possible in the game. Better than speed-hacking, better than direct damage passthrough — even better than pre-lockdown home invasions. Snidely Whiplash: Notorious UO Gold Duper Some of the beta testers had a secret. Not all of us, of course, but there were certain seedy elements of the beta testing crowd that, rather than follow the virtue of Honesty, chose to hoard their knowledge of exploits rather than report them to the development team. Once UO’s beta ended and the game launched, well, suddenly the economy was hit by a wave of item duping. What was this “carefully guarded” exploit? Abusing areaserv boundaries. Rubberbanding For Fun and Profit I still remember the first time I saw it for myself. It was 1997 and I was running around north of the orc encampment near the town of Cove when I saw some randos doing the weirdest thing ever: they were running back and forth over this annoyingly laggy patch of the game map while dropping little chests on the ground. Now, I knew this particular area as being… the  worst . You see, there was this truly annoying part of the map on that dirt path between the mountains and the orc fortress that was pretty unresponsive and jerky when you walked over it. In fact, if you  *ran*  across it you might get “rubberbanded” — finding yourself losing a few seconds of gameplay time as you bounced back to a previous position before the server “caught up.” (Remind me to tell you all about UO’s server/client interpolation and tick-rate someday!) This was especially bad if a monster, like an inconveniently placed Orc Captain directly south of you, was chasing you and whacked you to death during your pathetically laggy attempt to flee. Imagine my surprise when these two players started excitedly yelling to each other in text (which floated over their heads) that “it worked! omgz!” Yup, they had managed to, as they excitedly bragged, figure out a trick to drop a chest on one side of the “laggy patch” while trying to pick-it-up/hand-it-over to the other player as they were both crossing from one side to the other and now each of them had a copy of the same chest: and its contents. Dupers! Guards! Guards! Seamless Server Boundaries are Hard What I had seen was an exploit based on the “areaserv” boundaries that split up the playable gameworld of Ultima Online. UO never did anything the easy way; after all, its first generation of designers were trying things — inventing entirely new things — that later online games would simply shake their heads at and say “nah, that’s too hard.” For instance: how to load-balance thousands of players in a huge 29,360,128 meter² game map in 1997? Instead of having different “zones” with loading screens or “long, foggy mountain passes”, the UO developers just invented rectangular, seamless “sub-maps” with a (fairly!) invisible method that just let you walk from one side to the other, all while things on the other side were still visible and updating in real-time. UO’s Trammel Areaserv Boundary Definitions  (2012) Thus, each game server (or “shard”) you played on was actually divided into “areaservs” and there was some incredibly well-written “mirror” code that handled communicating gamestate, object conditions, and events from one side of the border to the other. But crossing those borders as a player, sometimes, was noticeably laggy. Aside:  If you look at the areaserv map above you may notice that Britannia should’ve been divided up a bit more carefully so that areaserv boundaries didn’t cut through important/populated gameplay areas… look at poor Buccaneer’s Den:  there’s a reason those hidden, underground tunnels were never fun to PvP in . The areaservs were essentially copying your player character and sending over a bundled message between themselves containing all your info. Once a player crossed the boundary it destroyed the old copy of the player on the initial side. And it wasn’t just players: autonomous mobile objects (mobs) like monsters, animals, and NPCs could cross them as well. (Note: for future exploits those monsters and animals  also  had their own backpacks/inventories players could piggyback exploit attempts on; lots of llama drama.) Naturally, any given bug with the areaserv code represented the greatest probable source of “duping” exploits, especially when coupled with purposefully manipulations of a player’s gamestate before the server backup/shutdown sequence each morning. We Felt Like We Were Playing Whack-a-Mole And after I joined the UO team I learned a few things: The areaserv code is brilliant. It’s been patched and rewritten many times, but by my later years it had gotten pretty “smart” about the way it anticipated player state and pre-serialized objects before boundary transfers even happened. Yet, no matter how good the code became, we developers had introduced so much complexity into the game that sources of dupes abounded regardless — and more often than not they weren’t just areaserv issues anymore. It didn’t help that the game designers could actually write production-level code in Wombat (our own event-based scripting language) that had tons of wrappers for the C++ object management code. It really felt like we were constantly on the backfoot; we couldn’t be very proactive about dupes and depended on player reports & customer service to identify egregious exploits. Then, one day I had this weird idea. UO Didn’t Have a Database There are a couple of things you have to know about UO as it was in the mid-2000’s. Each shard ran a shutdown/backup sequence at a certain time in the early morning hours. (Great for not having to fix memory leaks!) The complete gamestate of each areaserv was dumped from memory into a big binary backup file — by the time I had joined the team they were approaching about 4gb in size. Once the areaservs finished the backups they shut down, restart, and went into standby while the “gameserv” did the same thing. You can think of the gameserv as a server dedicated to coordinating all of the areaservs and passing along logged in players to the right areaserv. The gameserv would shut down, restart, and then instruct each areaserv to load its last known-good backup. Each areaserv would load the binary backup and recreate the previously saved state of the game; it would  also  execute any triggers/hooks in the scripting code for objects/mobiles that said “Do X when the server loads.” [A bunch of other stuff here, including spawning new mobs or daily rares] The areaservs would report all was well and inform the gameserv, and the gameserv would re-announce itself to the login servers that it was available for play. #2 was the biggest problem with trying to find dupes: UO’s gamestate wasn’t in a “database” — there was no way to query for player possessions or objects to find illicit goods. It was 4gbs of binary blob; the data only made sense when loaded back into the game itself. I tried though: I *wanted* to read the binary blobs. I *wanted* to give Customer Service tools to find duped or stolen items. It just wasn’t possible with the tools of the time. Then I remembered #5, and it gave me an idea for a different line of attack. A Global Hash Registry Every dynamic object in UO— whether a mobile, player, or item — is capable of storing both data and scripts on themselves. Scripts don’t hold state once code execution ends, so we would store needed data in “objvars” and attach them to the same objects the scripts were attached to. The scripts themselves contained tons of “triggers” which were event handlers tied to game conditions. As I mentioned in #5 above, one of them had a name that went something like “beforeServerLoad” (heck if I remember the actual name) that specifically executed during the backup loading stage of the areaserv startup process. I thought: “What if we just *marked* the most valuable items in the game whenever they loaded from backup?” I went to the lead engineer,  Supreem , and asked for just one addition to the C++ code and an associated mapping to a “Wombat func” for it: a hashing function (hello crypto!). I wanted to make the gameserv store a running list of “marked” items during the areaserv loading process to identify dupes. A global hash registry. A Plan Unfolds: Invisible Dye Here’s how it worked: Every object in the game, when it loaded, had a hook for a generic “preload” script that would attach itself, execute, and detach itself before it allowed the object to execute any other scripts. This was really useful for cleaning up deployment errors if we did something wrong and it broke any objects in the game during a patch. I added a trigger in the preload script with an “beforeServerLoad” event that checked the item’s type: if it was in a predetermined list of the most expensive/rare types of items, it continued with the plan. If the item didn’t have a “tag” on it, it was created now: an objvar of “string” type that contained a hash of the current time, areaserv, and gameserv id (and some other unique data). This was a really long, random looking piece of text (larger than a 32bit integer) like “29bb546a415ff874e5129549fe8064249e8f1b2996fa2e7d52879d2ec24e06fd”. Once it had a tag (or if it already did), it sent a message to the gameserv (remember, there was only one of these per shard) and asked the gameserv to put it in a lookup registry. If the *tag* already existed in the registry then the item was permanently marked as “I AM DUPED” (again, with an objvar) in plaintext — because Customer Service reps in the god client could see it. The lookup registry only persisted until the areaservs all loaded up, then it cleared out to save memory. The idea was that if a valuable item (worthy of duping) had a unique hash stored on itself as an objvar, then the duping process — whatever it may be — would copy that same objvar’s value. Then there would be two unique objects both holding the same hash. The best time to check for this (in bulk) was during server loads, and that system marked all the objects with an “I AM DUPED” objvar. (Note: my memory may be fuzzy here, and we may have had to tie the script to the onPlayerLoad event as well; I just don’t remember if players were all loaded with the areaserv or whether they were fetched from the backup data on-demand). It was a lot like stamping the rare items with some sort of invisible ink that only fluoresced under certain conditions. So we released the updated code and let it run globally for a few weeks. And then the hunt began. Mwaha. Mwahaha. MWAHAHAHAHAHA! The Corporate Reaction Within a couple of weeks we realized the first phase had worked: we had found a ton of duped rare items, and they were mostly held by the same set of player accounts across multiple game servers. Despite our excitement, this is where we paused: what do we do now? We sat down to talk with Management, Customer Service, and our Community Manager. Management Our producer was stoked to explain what we’d accomplished to the studio general manager. I remember sitting in the meeting with a smile on my face, pleased as punch (as only an arrogant young gamedev can be), just to hear something I wasn’t expecting: “Mmm, I don’t think deleting them all [the duped items] is a good idea, you’ll hurt too many players.” I hadn’t considered that, actually. At all. I was too excited about having accomplished my long held goal to “catch some dupers.” I wanted to chafe and say something, maybe assert that he just  didn’t understand , but reined myself in and after the meeting I went back to the team and told them that we were forbidden from auto-deleting all the dupes. Customer Service So we went to the CS team for data. It was true. It would’ve been a terrible idea. The dupes spread so quickly once they were created that if we just deleted them all out from under all the players who had bought them (with their hard-earned gold) from the dupers we would be affecting a  significant  portion of the playerbase. Sure, some of them would be fine with the “morality” of our action — but on the scale of hundreds or thousands of affected players (per shard) we were just asking for the frustration to cause a wave of quiet quitting. I really shouldn’t have been surprised by this: our studio’s general manager has been running MMOs for a lot longer than I ever had. To make matters more complicated the Customer Service team started asking us hard questions, like: “Exactly how many duped  runic valorite hammers  should a person have before we ban them?” What online game developers open up with every patch. Wait, we were supposed to assign an arbitrary value on how many dupes being held by one person was suspicious? Oh. Oh boy. This was harder than code. It was community design, not just game design. Community Manager Thankfully, we had a level-headed community manager who was used to our over-exuberance. Honestly, they were just used to managing  me  whenever I got too passionate about something. “CS is going to ban them [the actual dupers] anyways. Why not make it an event?” was about how that conversation went. Well, I was the lead live events designer, so… we plotted. Fire! Heh Heh, Fire! We identified the dupers themselves and their storage depos: they had homes full of their duped items and NPC vendors selling them to the players. The “duping ring” stretched across multiple servers, comprised of distinct groups not necessarily working together. They had all evolved the same behaviors though: making tons of UO gold from selling dupes and then selling the UO gold on secondary markets for hard cash. So Adida and I wrote a script, that, once attached to a house, would: Delete the house and all of its contents. All of it. Instantly. Recursively. *poof* Spawn a bunch of immovable “housing rubble” in a predetermined rectangular area that fit the same dimensions the house existed in. It was colored dark black to look like it had soot all over it. Spawn a bunch of eternal “fire fields” amongst the rubble. Create a straw dummy labeled “An Effigy of a Traitor” to place in the middle of the burning rubble. Then, we chose a day, and struck. Customer Service mass banned the dupers on a timer, right before their associated server came online. Then we paused the gameserv/loginserv connection to those same servers and Adida and I ran around (teleported, really) to each housing location, attached the script, watched the fires erupt with joy, and moved on. We did this in batches of related servers so that each “duping ring” didn’t have time to notice they were banned and try to log in on alt-accounts to empty their houses before we could get to them The Community Reacts Confusion! Chaos! Joy! Laughter! Another House Successfully Burnt to the Ground — With Particle Effects Discussion threads popped up on Stratics and  MMORPG.com  almost instantly, full of wonderings and guesses — and a few false suggestions like that a CS employee had been caught up in the banning (false!). Well That’s Neat, But Don’t Do It Again Dozens of homes had been destroyed across the entire multiverse of Ultima Online, and the flames licking the sooty rubble were a visible testimony to our team’s determination to deal with cheaters. It felt fantastic! And we were told not to do it again. Lol. We took some flak for doing something so daringly public to cheating players — even though we made sure not to  identify  them to the other players directly — but still just barely skated by with upper-upper-upper management. Customer Service was instructed to use their discretion to deal with “I AM DUPED” items from then on, and honestly, by now I don’t know if anyone even remembers that the system exists (if it even does). Some Lessons Learned (Satoshi Surprise?) Readers who’ve been exposed to NFTs might notice the eerie resemblance of us marking these rare items (which were non-fungible!) with unique hashes to how blockchain-based Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) work today. Ironically, one thing that our method didn’t work on was *stacks* of objects (fungible items like gold coins). But  Satoshi Nakamoto solved that problem too! The first Bitcoin paper describes a perfect method (online or offline) for validating timestamped events like currency creation . It would’ve helped prevent dupes *and* ensured internal bad actors (with item creation powers) couldn’t just generate a bunch of gold to sell outside the game. Not that I’m saying MMOs need blockchains; but it turns out Proof-of-Work ledger technology had a use case here! (No wonder  Amazon now offers a similar service: QLDB ). Finally, one of the biggest things we learned was having to deal with the economics *after* the fire: especially when players wanted to compete for the now available, very  premium , housing spots. But that’s another story. About the Author Tim “Draconi” Cotten  was the lead game designer of Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss, and when he’s not writing up stories from the wild days of online gaming is working on applying all those hard-won lessons to Metaverse design. Follow him on Twitter  for more Ultima related stories! -- -- 4 More from Cotten.IO Follow Technology - established, emerging, disruptive, speculative Read more from    Cotten.IO Recommended from Medium Rowan Kaiser How To Play Mass Effect — Start With ME2 Sammie Aran Sammie’s Opinion — SSBU: Steve and Minecraft! Sleeping Donut in Donut Lab Donut Punks was released for iOS and got downloaded over 1 million times! THEWEB BAZAR HOW CAN MAKE A GAME DEVELOPER Reynolds Sandbox in The Reynolds Sandbox Media Tips: Drew Scanlon, Clothmapping the World Through Games Draconid in Dota Observatory MDL Chengdu Major Data Analysis Platunovnikita PlanetQuest is a unique exploration, survival and discovery game. Alice Mathew Top 5 Game Development Software About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Tim Cotten 691 Followers Founder of Scrypted Inc: Building interactive digital assets for the Metaverse. < tim@cotten.io > @cottenio Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

format - Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in ITNEXT Glauber Costa Follow Oct 4 · 6 min read Save SQLite: QEMU all over again? In a trip down memory lane, I recall my experience with QEMU, and how the project changed completely to accommodate a new industry trend. Is SQLite history rhyming all over again? I first heard of QEMU in the early 2000s. QEMU was the brainchild of  Fabrice Bellard . Fabrice is, without any exaggeration, a true genius. Don’t believe me? Those are just some of his achievements from his Wikipedia page: Came up with the formula  for calculating the nth digit of pi in base 16. Computed pi to 2.7 trillion digits with a desktop computer for the first time, in 2009. Created  FFmpeg , one of the most widely used video encoders. Created  QEMU , a fast full-system emulator translating between pretty much every processor architecture. How emulators worked before QEMU I first heard of QEMU around 2006. I was into computer architecture from my early days, and most emulators at the time would simply naively translate instructions from into the emulated architecture at runtime. QEMU, on the other hand, employed a “Tiny Code Generator” to translate instructions through JIT compilation. It wasn’t as fast as running natively, but for a variety of applications it was  fast enough  and for many use cases it felt like pure miracle. QEMU also had its own emulation for common physical devices you would expect to find, its own  disk image format , and much more. Virtualization shifts the industry But around that time, something else was brewing. Virtualization was becoming mainstream in the industry. The idea of virtualization is different from emulation. If you are just trying to run an isolated workload, and not something for a different architecture altogether, you can just execute the instructions natively. This is easier said than done, because processors have privileged instructions that would allow you to access other virtual machines. But the approach pioneered by the Xen project in 2004, called paravirtualization, suggested that if you are okay with changing the Operating System — since user programs can’t call into privileged instructions anyway — then you can safely run many virtual machines together to get the job done. Later, both Intel and AMD released their own process extensions that would provide a shadow view of the processor’s privileged state and allow solutions like KVM, which later came to power AWS’s Nitro to rise. Getting QEMU to do Virtualization Both of those solutions solved the problem of how to execute VM instructions. But a full solution also requires the VMs to have isolated views of  devices,  like sound cards, graphic cards, disks, etc. QEMU had all that, and was pretty awesome, and everybody wanted to reuse it. But QEMU was a solution for emulation, not virtualization. QEMU was an open source project, but the community was not very interested in the whole virtualization thing. As a matter of fact, being mostly maintained by volunteers, the community didn’t seem very interested in a lot except for a very narrow set of personal interests. And hey, no judgment here: I too have maintained things as an unpaid volunteer, and I know how hard it is! But be it as it may, we now had this amazing solution that did  almost  everything we needed, a lot of other communities building things around it, trying their best to keep things unchanged for ease of upgrade reasons. Until the inevitable happened: we forked QEMU through the  qemu-kvm  project. No contributions led to fragmentation In a sense, because everybody was taking bits and pieces of QEMU to build their device models, QEMU  was already forked.  That work laid the foundation that enabled QEMU itself (albeit a fork of it), to be extended for the purpose of virtualization by replacing the processor emulation with a native one. This repository became a common one for all parties interested in pushing the envelope of what QEMU could do, and over time, that essentially became the  new  QEMU: it could still do Emulation as well as before — or better, since many of the improvements were very generic, but now could also do virtualization, opening up a completely new applications for the project. Is SQLite at a similar fork in the road? When I look around today, I see a very similar situation developing around SQLite. SQLite is the brainchild of  D. Richard Hipp , who was also involved with the  Tcl  programming language, and his  own version control system , among others. Same as Fabrice, an undoubtedly smart and achieved individual. The code for SQLite is also available, but contributing is even harder than it was at the QEMU days: SQLite is explicitly and unequivocally “ Open Source, not Open Contribution ”. The few core developers they have do not work with modern tools like git and collaboration tools like Github, and don’t accept contributions, although they may or may not accept your suggestion for a new feature request. Much like QEMU, new trends in the industry are taking it into a completely new direction: the rise of use cases around Edge compute, due to its limited resources and limited environments means that SQLite fits the bill perfectly. However, edge computing also means that your code will be running in many geographical locations, as close as possible to the user for the better possible latency. Which means that the data that hits a single SQLite instance now needs to be replicated to all the others. Parallels between the rise of Virtualization and the rise of the Edge. Many solutions to the problem of how to run SQLite, but with distributed data emerged. A few notable of them are: rqlite : a full blown distributed database similar to CockroachDB, but using SQLite as a storage engine. You talk to it over the wire, and it is no longer an embeddable database. BedrockdB : similar to rqlite, also built around SQLite. dqlite : a combination of SQLite & RAFT, written in C, that keeps the embeddable aspect of SQLite. But because you have to be explicit about the networking events, ORMs like sqlx won’t work and/or have to be adapted. ChiselStore : My own attempt at the problem. Close to dqlite (but in Rust), and ultimately, as I found out, suffers from many of the same problems. LiteFS : as its biggest advantage, it is the fact that it sits  behind  SQLite, so everything that works with SQLite, works with LiteFS. Something’s gotta give, and under the current limitations of not changing SQLite, their approach is to essentially provide a distributed FUSE filesystem that spreads the writes and deals with the consensus problems. It comes with its own set of issues, many of them raised in this  HackerNews thread . I personally think that if distributed filesystems were easy, we’d have a good one by now. But under the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed, it is the best approach by far. Kudos to Ben and the team! What if SQLite accepted contributions? Why the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed? Sure, nobody wants to keep patched software around, and nobody wants to require users to install alternative versions of core software like SQLite. This is a classic  prisoner’s dilemma  situation: if one of us carries a fork of SQLite, that’s a losing proposition in the long term. As the story of QEMU — and frankly many others — teaches us, if we manage to convene together, we all win. That is why today I am starting, together with some of my peers,  libSQL . It is a place for all of us to come together and build a new generation of what SQLite as an embedded database should be. We want to build a strong and independent community, with a clear code of conduct, and if you ever felt like SQLite could change to accommodate the future, you’re more than welcome to come build with us. There are more details of what we want to achieve on our  manifesto . Here are some issues we’d like to tackle: We would like to use io_uring and asynchronous interfaces We would like to provide replication hooks for distributed systems We would like to allow for WASM-based user-defined functions What would you like to contribute? I’m all ears. You can reach out to us at: Github Discussions Discord -- -- 6 More from ITNEXT Follow ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. Read more from    ITNEXT Recommended from Medium Harshita Shivhare License to Freedom Learner CARES in Analytics Vidhya Part 3.2 !! Pandas DataFrame to PostgreSQL using Python Bromcom Switching MIS: So you’re thinking of switching Bruno Morel in B-Yond The Blog Ending the myth of the 10x, 100x, SuperStar programmer — quants Nekrasov Aleksandr Dates in java-based REST API’s Tom Jebbo (PycraftDev) How we are making a Video Game in Python #7 Juan in Analytics Vidhya Emmy Awards — Building my own R Shiny Framework David Khourshid CSS Animations with Finite State Machines About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Glauber Costa 518 Followers Founder and CEO of ChiselStrike. Join me!  https://github.com/chiselstrike/chiselstrike .  https://discord.com/invite/GHNN9CNAZe . Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable

read - "Medium is a great place to read and learn from a wide range of authors. Itâs not muddied up by ads. It feels like one of the few pure places to go online." Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Go Into The Story Scott Myers Follow Oct 6 · 9 min read · Member-only Save Tarantino, Sorkin, and Dialogue as Purpose Analysis of long dialogue-centric scenes in  The Social Network  and  Pulp Fiction  reveals that underneath the entertaining conversations lies their respective narrative function: to move the plot forward. Quentin Tarantino and Aaron Sorkin In a recent online class I taught on dialogue, the writers taking the course and I had some really enlightening discussions including this one about two masters in this arena: Aaron Sorkin and Quentin Tarantino. Both of them are known for the occasional long dialogue-laden scene and we might be tempted to interpret these as just being about entertainment. Read this excerpt from my first lecture which precipitated the online conversation, considering the screenwriting principle Dialogue = Purpose. The first 8+ pages of  The Social Network  script would appear to be the very epitome of  purposelessness . Apart from introducing two key characters — Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) and Erica (Rooney Mara) — the dialogue zigs and zags from one topic to the next, a confused quilt of references and observations. Here is a list of topics in the scene: People with genius IQs in China How to “distinguish yourself” amongst people who got 1600 on SAT’s A Capella choir, rowing crew, inventing a “25 dollar PC” Final club World class athletes rowing crew How girls like cowboys Exclusivity Various final clubs at Harvard with the Porc being the “best of the best” Theodore Roosevelt Mark’s friend Eduardo made $300,000 betting on oil futures Predicting weather and the price of heating oil Spat about Erica asking which final club is the “easiest to get into” Spat about Erica calling it “finals” club Spat about Erica calling Mark “obsessed,” he says he’s “motivated” Mark thinks Erica speaks in “code” Mark says “I need to do something substantial” to get the “attention” of the clubs Mark: “Because they’re exclusive. And fun and they lead to a better life.” Mark: “You should be a lot more supportive,” benefits for her if he was in a club She tells him she is no longer his girlfriend Mark says Erica used to sleep with the door guy of the club they’re drinking in Erica gets angry and says she’s leaving Mark tries to apologize Erica says dating Mark is “exhausting” Mark disparages B.U. (Boston University) where Erica goes to college Erica delivers two “stingers” and leaves him 8 plus pages. 111 sides of dialogue. Where is the purpose in this scene? Dialogue conveys exposition : If we define exposition as information, data, and backstory, we can see how Sorkin laces a lot of it into these pages: Information: Mark attends Harvard; Erica attends B.U.; the Porcellian is the most exclusive final club at Harvard; Teddy Roosevelt was a Porc. Data: The number of geniuses in China; Eduardo made $300K last year. Backstory: Mark got 1600 on his SAT; Mark and Erica have been romantically involved; Mark thinks Erica used to sleep with the door guy. This exposition is key in establishing the story’s setting (contemporary Harvard) and some of the basics of the Protagonist (Mark) and Attractor (Erica) characters. Dialogue reveals a character’s inner life : Through text and subtext, Sorkin conveys important aspects of both Mark and Erica’s thoughts and feelings: Mark: He is looking to distinguish himself; he feels pressure to do “something substantial” with his life; his reaction to Erica’s comment about the easiest final club shows he has personal insecurities; he thinks she should be more supportive of his desire to join a final club; Mark is dismissive of B.U. as an academic institution; his goal is a “better life.” Erica: She thinks Mark is “obsessed” with final clubs; she has a difficult time following Mark’s way of thinking and talking; she gets angry at Mark’s insensitivity (i.e., door guy accusation, derision of B.U. and by extension her own intellect); she finds being with Mark “exhausting.” The purpose of this facet of the scene’s dialogue is to go beyond exposition and provide readers a deeper insight into the inner workings of these two pivotal characters. Dialogue distinguishes one character from another : In what they say and how they say it, Sorkin creates a clear sense of Mark and Erica’s individual identities: Mark: He is extremely, almost excessively verbal; he is kinetic, his ideas spewing forth; he carries on his own internal conversation that often loses Erica; he is essentially humorless. Erica: Less intelligent, but smarter socially; she tries to use humor to make points (“You don’t care if side effects may include  blindness , okay, just do it,” “What part of Long Island are you from — England”); she is primarily reactive to him; she does not waffle in her decision to break up with him. There is also this subtle distinction between them. Whereas Erica is actually hurt by Mark’s derisive comments, unintentional though they may be, when Erica dumps him, Mark doesn’t feel distress so much as shock, as if it is unfathomable she would have any reason to terminate their relationship. At this level of purpose, Sorkin not only distinguishes the two characters in terms of the text of their words, but also the subtext, the deeper emotional meaning  under  their words. Dialogue moves the plot forward : Within the realm of a story universe, perhaps the single most important purpose of dialogue is to advance the plot. On the surface this extended exchange between these two characters in  The Social Network  seems precisely like a conversation with little or no substantive part to play in terms of the narrative. A closer examination reveals the scene moves the plot ahead in two ways: (1) The scene itself has a clear Beginning, Middle and End; (2) Its end point is a critical event that sets into motion everything else that follows in the plot. Scene structure: The Beginning of the scene revolves around establishing Mark’s powerful desire to get into a final club. The Middle involves Erica calling into question Mark’s obsession while Mark challenges her to support him, and in so doing provides one dismissive comment toward her after another. The Ending centers on Erica breaking up with Mark. Point of the scene: It’s the break-up and specifically Erica’s final lines to Mark as she leaves: Here is the scene from the movie: The point of the scene is two-fold: (1) Erica breaks up with Mark. (2) Erica’s parting shot becomes a verbal talisman to inspire Mark to make something of himself and join a final club. The scene’s ending dialogue caps off this key purpose of the scene tied to the plot. Mark Walker, one of the writers in the class, responded with this: I think that is a key observation that those new to screenwriting (like myself) need to get into their heads. I think, when I started out, I was probably of the mind that dialogue wasn’t as important as the scene description and visual “delivery” of the film. As I have wised up a bit (there is still a lot of room for further improvement) from reading books and blogs, and the SMC (Screenwriting Master Class), it has become clearer just how powerful good dialogue can be, let alone great dialogue. it is interesting to watch films knowing this and think about how the dialogue works so well. Scott’s example clearly shows this, and how it is an art to make it look like conversation when it actually isn’t. To throw all that stuff at you that you probably don’t recognize as character building and exposition until later in the movie when you get those call-backs that relate to some of that conversation and it all clicks into place, is a vital skill. I would compare this to Tarantino introducing Jules and Vincent as they approach the building where the guys with Marcellus’ brief case are waiting. An excerpt: Here’s the scene from the movie: I think we get all four of Scott’s purposes in that conversation which, on the surface of it, sounds like two guys just chewing the fat about work and shit. But we hear about (amongst everything else): Vincent being in Amsterdam — he has been away and missed some stuff We get banter about their weapons which tells us they are gangsters/hitmen….dangerous Jules is catching him up about the guy that gave Mia foot massage This tells us their boss is a hard man not to be messed with We hear Vincent has been asked to “take her out” while Marcellus is away — setting up the next part of the story. Jules concern in relation to foot massages tells us more about their boss and theor perception of him. The dialogue tells us about the suitcase Macguffin. We get to learn that Vincent and Jules are very different — Jules is respectful and more refined than Vincent who is a little more brash — all found from a conversation about giving foot massages We get everything; exposition, inner life of the characters, we learn how they are different from each other and plot moves forward with regards the macguffin. By the time we are ready to kick the door down we know exactly who these two guys are, what they do for a living and who they work for, as well as a bit about their past and what is in store for them (or at least Vincent) in the next chapter. None of the dialogue is “wasted” or “filler” — like everything else with screenwriting — if it doesn’t serve the story, does it need to be cut? That example you cite from  Pulp Fiction  works as entertainment straight-out, thus if we don’t look closer, we may assume it’s just QT riffing with dialogue, pure and simple. But if we  do  examine the content, we see, as you pointed out so well with your analysis, Mark, that there is a purpose to the conversation; in fact,  several  of them, in effect setting up a few important subplots. A comparison of this scene and the opening to  The Social Network  reveals that everything hangs on the dialogue’s tie-in to and advancement of the plot. In fact, if one were to boil down each scene to the single most important contribution each makes to the plot, it’s right there: Pulp Fiction : To establish the upcoming “date” Vincent is going to have with Mia and the pressure he will be under to handle that properly re Marcellus and his temper. That sets everything in that subplot into motion including Vincent scoring the heroin as a way of taking the edge of the date which leads to Mia overdosing on it (thinking it’s cocaine), and so forth. The Social Network : The breakup of Mark and Erica which, as the denouement shows [even though the entirety of their subplot is only four or five beats], provides one huge motivation on Mark’s part to succeed: To prove he has worth in response to her rejection of him. Takeaway: Dialogue = Purpose. This is true even if you go off on a riff à la Tarantino and Sorkin. Tie the dialogue to those four markers, but most especially to the advancement of the plot. I don’t care how good you are with dialogue, if you write a scene in which the dialogue has zero impact on the plot, you should consider reshaping the scene to make it relevant to the plot or drop the scene entirely as being extraneous. What are your thoughts about how important dialogue is to plot? Comment Archive -- -- 1 More from Go Into The Story Follow Official Screenwriting Blog of The Black List Read more from    Go Into The Story Recommended from Medium Robert Ralph in New Writers Welcome How to add a signature file Ilana Quinn in Writers’ Blokke How to Research for Historical Fiction Sakshi Udavant (Luna) in The Brave Writer A Client Just Rejected My Work And I Have Never Been Happier Ellie Jacobson Get Your Write On: Setting Yourself Up for NaNoWriMo Success Sherry McGuinn in Rogues’ Gallery Men, Got a Problem With the Ladies? Jessica A in The Book Mechanic 4 Personal Qualities All Successful Writers Share Rosa de Saron C. in Publishing Well Is Writing Long Form Really Worth It Scott A. Gese in Success in Mind Medium: Are You Sure You Want to Take This Ride? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Scott Myers 35K Followers Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium has a number of tools to connect you with over 100 million readers on the platform and beyond. Some ways you can build your audience are by  starting a newsletter ,Â  submitting to publications ,  following the distribution standards , and  sharing your stories  on social media. We also encourage you to check out our blog,  3 Minute Read , for more helpful tips and tricks â like  how to write a great headline  and  SEO tips to make your stories more discoverable . Pocket: Save. Read. Grow. Become a Medium member to enjoy unlimited access and  directly support the writers you read most. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write 108K Followers Follow Home About Creators Hub Scott Lamb · Sep 21 Updates on Medium’s distribution system Clarity on how distribution works, and a change to notifications —  One of our most important jobs here at Medium is to connect readers with valuable stories. We’re always updating and improving our system to do that crucial job better. Today, we’re taking a minute to clarify how distribution on Medium works. Until recently, our distribution system was binary, where some… Medium 2 min read Alex Benzer · Sep 9 Android Audio and Homepage Topics New updates to help you get more value from your reading time —  Your time matters. That’s why our team is committed to helping you get the most out of the time you spend reading on Medium. This means helping you find stories that are relevant to your interests and goals; knowledge that goes beyond entertainment to positively impact your life. … Medium 3 min read Medium Staff · Aug 29 It Happened on Medium: The First 10 Years A somewhat complete history of our first decade, and the stories that got us talking, thinking, and sharing —  Medium turned 10 this month. A decade ago, we built a place on the internet for stories that aren’t too long or too short, but… that in-between length. Our simple, beautiful publishing tools gave you the freedom to focus on your words, and our platform connected you with other readers… Medium 13 min read Breana Jones · Aug 24 Custom Domains, Mobile Editor, and a True Following Feed Working towards an innovative product you can rely on —  A big part of our work at Medium centers around earning and building trust with you, our readers, and creators. We want to be clear where we can and we want to build in public with you. In that vein, we have a couple of announcements to share. Custom Domains are back for good We first… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Breana Jones · Aug 5 Make Medium Yours It’s now easier to own your experience —  Hola readers and creators, I’m back to share more updates! I mentioned in my last 3MR that we value listening to you, and we make changes based on your feedback. One thing we’ve heard is that you aren’t always satisfied with the recommendations you see on your homepage. That’s something… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Alex Benzer · Aug 3 Introducing Tipping on Medium (beta) Add a customizable tipping button to your stories and start receiving direct support from your readers. —  “How can we make writing more sustainable and rewarding?” That question has always been top of mind for our team here at Medium. … Medium 2 min read Breana Jones · Aug 2 Listening shows up in the details A few changes that wouldn’t normally deserve their own blog post. —  Recently we’ve started being more clear about how much we value listening to our community. Or as our new CEO Tony Stubblebine says, : “Help mold the future of Medium by telling us what is important to you.” I’m one of the people who wants to hear from you. … 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Sandee Roston · Jul 12 Medium names technology and digital media veteran Tony Stubblebine CEO; founder Ev Williams transitions to Chairman of the Board Medium announced today that Tony Stubblebine will become Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors, effective July 20, 2022. Medium founder and Chief Executive Officer Ev Williams will transition to the newly-created role of chairman of the board. Ev Williams founded Medium in 2012, and has… Medium 2 min read Tony Stubblebine · Jul 12 Hello Medium readers, authors, editors and publishers I’m the new CEO. —  There are so many different reasons to read Medium and so many different reasons to publish on Medium. We are a very large community consisting of hundreds of millions of readers and many thousands of authors. That is our strength. I know this because I’ve been deeply involved with Medium… 3 min read Alex Benzer · May 16 Listen to stories anytime, anywhere. Audio is now on iOS. Today, following the success of audio on the Medium website, we’re rolling out the feature to our iOS app. Making it easy to soak up new ideas is the heart of Medium’s mission — and now that’s more convenient than ever. … Medium 3 min read Get started The official Medium blog Follow Connect with    3 min read Editors Medium Staff News and updates from the staff at Medium. Follow Alex Benzer Director of Product @ Medium Follow Warren Shaeffer vp @medium, co-founder @knowablefyi, 3x co-founder (human + biz), very lucky, medium funny. wip. Follow See all Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Who can read the work I publish on Medium? Download our app so you can read wherever you are. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Buck Down Follow Oct 4 · 13 min read · Member-only What the Fuck Just Happened at Burning Man? image by  Chayna Girling I t’s been just under four weeks since I returned from Burning Man. My 15th deployment there as an employee and the 24th overall. Like a LOT of other people — I’m still trying to sort out what  the fuck  just happened back there. I’m one of the lucky ones. I was only out there for a month. There are still friends of mine out there that have been there since July who won’t get cut loose to fend for themselves until… -- -- 20 More from Buck Down Follow Professional traveling musician, artist and writer. Amateur comedian and smart person. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Rebbie Elise Interview: Stand-up comedian Natasha Brock on Periods, Representation and Laughing *with*… Pamela Nicolas SNOW WHITE: The Fairest of Them All Journal Starting with R Early morning thoughts Andrew Katz Where is the “too” in Dylan Farrow’s #me? Robert Cormack The Oddity of Words. Bill Keshlear The Way of the West: Culture displacement and appropriation Sufiya Abdur-Rahman in Gay Mag The Superhero Show Challenging Viewers on Racial Injustice mel I Have To Explain The Joke About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Buck Down 783 Followers Professional traveling musician, artist and writer. Amateur comedian and smart person. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Our app brings the full Medium experience wherever you are, so you can read, write and publish even when youâre offline. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in ITNEXT Glauber Costa Follow Oct 4 · 6 min read Save SQLite: QEMU all over again? In a trip down memory lane, I recall my experience with QEMU, and how the project changed completely to accommodate a new industry trend. Is SQLite history rhyming all over again? I first heard of QEMU in the early 2000s. QEMU was the brainchild of  Fabrice Bellard . Fabrice is, without any exaggeration, a true genius. Don’t believe me? Those are just some of his achievements from his Wikipedia page: Came up with the formula  for calculating the nth digit of pi in base 16. Computed pi to 2.7 trillion digits with a desktop computer for the first time, in 2009. Created  FFmpeg , one of the most widely used video encoders. Created  QEMU , a fast full-system emulator translating between pretty much every processor architecture. How emulators worked before QEMU I first heard of QEMU around 2006. I was into computer architecture from my early days, and most emulators at the time would simply naively translate instructions from into the emulated architecture at runtime. QEMU, on the other hand, employed a “Tiny Code Generator” to translate instructions through JIT compilation. It wasn’t as fast as running natively, but for a variety of applications it was  fast enough  and for many use cases it felt like pure miracle. QEMU also had its own emulation for common physical devices you would expect to find, its own  disk image format , and much more. Virtualization shifts the industry But around that time, something else was brewing. Virtualization was becoming mainstream in the industry. The idea of virtualization is different from emulation. If you are just trying to run an isolated workload, and not something for a different architecture altogether, you can just execute the instructions natively. This is easier said than done, because processors have privileged instructions that would allow you to access other virtual machines. But the approach pioneered by the Xen project in 2004, called paravirtualization, suggested that if you are okay with changing the Operating System — since user programs can’t call into privileged instructions anyway — then you can safely run many virtual machines together to get the job done. Later, both Intel and AMD released their own process extensions that would provide a shadow view of the processor’s privileged state and allow solutions like KVM, which later came to power AWS’s Nitro to rise. Getting QEMU to do Virtualization Both of those solutions solved the problem of how to execute VM instructions. But a full solution also requires the VMs to have isolated views of  devices,  like sound cards, graphic cards, disks, etc. QEMU had all that, and was pretty awesome, and everybody wanted to reuse it. But QEMU was a solution for emulation, not virtualization. QEMU was an open source project, but the community was not very interested in the whole virtualization thing. As a matter of fact, being mostly maintained by volunteers, the community didn’t seem very interested in a lot except for a very narrow set of personal interests. And hey, no judgment here: I too have maintained things as an unpaid volunteer, and I know how hard it is! But be it as it may, we now had this amazing solution that did  almost  everything we needed, a lot of other communities building things around it, trying their best to keep things unchanged for ease of upgrade reasons. Until the inevitable happened: we forked QEMU through the  qemu-kvm  project. No contributions led to fragmentation In a sense, because everybody was taking bits and pieces of QEMU to build their device models, QEMU  was already forked.  That work laid the foundation that enabled QEMU itself (albeit a fork of it), to be extended for the purpose of virtualization by replacing the processor emulation with a native one. This repository became a common one for all parties interested in pushing the envelope of what QEMU could do, and over time, that essentially became the  new  QEMU: it could still do Emulation as well as before — or better, since many of the improvements were very generic, but now could also do virtualization, opening up a completely new applications for the project. Is SQLite at a similar fork in the road? When I look around today, I see a very similar situation developing around SQLite. SQLite is the brainchild of  D. Richard Hipp , who was also involved with the  Tcl  programming language, and his  own version control system , among others. Same as Fabrice, an undoubtedly smart and achieved individual. The code for SQLite is also available, but contributing is even harder than it was at the QEMU days: SQLite is explicitly and unequivocally “ Open Source, not Open Contribution ”. The few core developers they have do not work with modern tools like git and collaboration tools like Github, and don’t accept contributions, although they may or may not accept your suggestion for a new feature request. Much like QEMU, new trends in the industry are taking it into a completely new direction: the rise of use cases around Edge compute, due to its limited resources and limited environments means that SQLite fits the bill perfectly. However, edge computing also means that your code will be running in many geographical locations, as close as possible to the user for the better possible latency. Which means that the data that hits a single SQLite instance now needs to be replicated to all the others. Parallels between the rise of Virtualization and the rise of the Edge. Many solutions to the problem of how to run SQLite, but with distributed data emerged. A few notable of them are: rqlite : a full blown distributed database similar to CockroachDB, but using SQLite as a storage engine. You talk to it over the wire, and it is no longer an embeddable database. BedrockdB : similar to rqlite, also built around SQLite. dqlite : a combination of SQLite & RAFT, written in C, that keeps the embeddable aspect of SQLite. But because you have to be explicit about the networking events, ORMs like sqlx won’t work and/or have to be adapted. ChiselStore : My own attempt at the problem. Close to dqlite (but in Rust), and ultimately, as I found out, suffers from many of the same problems. LiteFS : as its biggest advantage, it is the fact that it sits  behind  SQLite, so everything that works with SQLite, works with LiteFS. Something’s gotta give, and under the current limitations of not changing SQLite, their approach is to essentially provide a distributed FUSE filesystem that spreads the writes and deals with the consensus problems. It comes with its own set of issues, many of them raised in this  HackerNews thread . I personally think that if distributed filesystems were easy, we’d have a good one by now. But under the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed, it is the best approach by far. Kudos to Ben and the team! What if SQLite accepted contributions? Why the assumption that SQLite can’t be changed? Sure, nobody wants to keep patched software around, and nobody wants to require users to install alternative versions of core software like SQLite. This is a classic  prisoner’s dilemma  situation: if one of us carries a fork of SQLite, that’s a losing proposition in the long term. As the story of QEMU — and frankly many others — teaches us, if we manage to convene together, we all win. That is why today I am starting, together with some of my peers,  libSQL . It is a place for all of us to come together and build a new generation of what SQLite as an embedded database should be. We want to build a strong and independent community, with a clear code of conduct, and if you ever felt like SQLite could change to accommodate the future, you’re more than welcome to come build with us. There are more details of what we want to achieve on our  manifesto . Here are some issues we’d like to tackle: We would like to use io_uring and asynchronous interfaces We would like to provide replication hooks for distributed systems We would like to allow for WASM-based user-defined functions What would you like to contribute? I’m all ears. You can reach out to us at: Github Discussions Discord -- -- 6 More from ITNEXT Follow ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. Read more from    ITNEXT Recommended from Medium Harshita Shivhare License to Freedom Learner CARES in Analytics Vidhya Part 3.2 !! Pandas DataFrame to PostgreSQL using Python Bromcom Switching MIS: So you’re thinking of switching Bruno Morel in B-Yond The Blog Ending the myth of the 10x, 100x, SuperStar programmer — quants Nekrasov Aleksandr Dates in java-based REST API’s Tom Jebbo (PycraftDev) How we are making a Video Game in Python #7 Juan in Analytics Vidhya Emmy Awards — Building my own R Shiny Framework David Khourshid CSS Animations with Finite State Machines About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Glauber Costa 518 Followers Founder and CEO of ChiselStrike. Join me!  https://github.com/chiselstrike/chiselstrike .  https://discord.com/invite/GHNN9CNAZe . Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Become a Medium member to enjoy unlimited access and directly support the writers you read most. Read, write, and expand your world. Read any article in our entire library across all your devices â with no paywalls, story limits or ads. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. For every post of congratulations to the Figma team for having their years of hard work pay off, there were a dozen more lamenting what Adobe will do to their favorite… Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Boris Müller Follow Mar 8, 2019 · 6 min read · Member-only Type Casting — or: The Comic Sans of Errors Typefaces resemble actors. Helvetica is Tom Hanks.  But who is Comic Sans? Calligraphy:  Stefanie Weigele A  common question in my first-year design seminars is also a popular question in the design community: ‘Why is Comic Sans considered such a bad typeface?’ Discussing typefaces with people who have just started to learn and practice design is… -- -- 31 More from Boris Müller Follow Professor for Interaction Design at FH Potsdam, co-director of Urban Complexity Lab | http://uclab.fh-potsdam.de | http://esono.com Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Shadows Pub in Coffee Muse Valentine’s Doodles & Quotes Andy Woodruff Your maps are not lying to you The Kitchn Pro Best Ever Kitchen Island Decoration Ideas Yellow Images How To Use Mockups with 3D Smart Layers Nathalie J Siegel Surrealism in a Movie Filmed at the Merchandise Mart and in a Chicago Michelin Star Restaurant Oğuzhan Öçalan in Bootcamp Case study: Newslabturkey identity design Nicole Hewitt What does fitness mean to you? Catherine Erzetic in code3100 WEEK 5: PROCESS TO BUILDING AN IDEA About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Boris Müller 5.8K Followers Professor for Interaction Design at FH Potsdam, co-director of Urban Complexity Lab |  http://uclab.fh-potsdam.de  |  http://esono.com Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium is an open platform where over 100 million readers come to find insightful and dynamic thinking. Here, expert and undiscovered voices alike dive into the heart of any topic and bring new ideas to the surface. Use the Medium app to easily find and follow the writers and publications that matter to you, and keep up on their latest posts. Explore personalized, ad-free recommendations, and dive deeper on just about any topic. Bookmark posts for later, highlight passages that resonate, and join the conversation on the stories you read. Receive unlimited access to all Medium stories and support great writing by becoming a member for $5/month or $50/year, and enjoy your first month free. Your Medium membership will automatically renew each month or each year, and you will be charged $4.99 or $49.99 through your iTunes account within 24-hours prior to the end of the current monthly or yearly cycle. You can turn off auto-renew at any time from your iTunes account settings up until 24-hours before the end of the current period, but refunds will not be provided for any unused portion of the term. Please visit our Membership Terms of Service for more information: https://me.dm/subscription-terms Medium Terms of Service: https://policy.medium.com/medium-terms-of-service-9db0094a1e0f Questions? Feedback? To get help, visit https://help.medium.com Privacy Policy: https://policy.medium.com/medium-privacy-policy-f03bf92035c9 Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Pavan Kashyap Google's Achilles' Heel: Enabling Conversations Seoananthinfo SAP Helps Customers Map Their Road to the Intelligent Enterprise Rinku Prakash in iSchedul Impact of No Shows on Businesses and Economy & the Role of Technology on Mitigation Axial in Axial Axial S-1 Club — 908 Devices ْ Kerry Logistics picks up 50% in Indev Logistics for Rs.500-Cr Christine Russo Got 15 Minutes? Ethiopia COVID-19 Response Team in Africa COVID-19 Response Toolkit: The Blog 5 key steps in mobilizing COVID-19 response efforts in Africa Fintech Decoded in Fintech M&A Open Banking is rewiring the payments infrastructure About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 465 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Medium has a number of tools to connect you with over 170 million readers on the platform and beyond. Some ways you can build your audience are by  starting a newsletter , Â  submitting to publications ,  following the distribution standards , and  sharing your stories  on social media. We also encourage you to check out our blog,  3 Minute Read , for more helpful tips and tricks â like  how to write a great headline  and  SEO tips to make your stories more discoverable . Anyone on the internet can read your stories. Even if your story is being distributed in the Partner Program as a part of our  metered paywall , anyone can still read a limited number of articles for free each month. If you want to share an un-metered version of your story, you can use a  Friend Link . Read our blog Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Luke Burgis Follow Oct 8 · 4 min read · Member-only Your Personal Occam’s Razor How to rescue yourself and the people you love from the confusion and indistinction of faceless crowds. Image created with DALL-E for this article. “The true inner self must be drawn up like a jewel from the bottom of the sea, rescued from confusion, from indistinction, from immersion in the common, the nondescript, the trivial, the sordid, the evanescent.” — Thomas Merton -- -- 3 More from Luke Burgis Follow Author of “WANTING: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life.” Find more at read.lukeburgis.com Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Arpit Agrawal in Breathing Alive If you were to die in the next 365 days, would you do this? Renata Giarola The art of cultivating good envy Jessica Delfino in OneAndDoneMom What It’s Like To Be 42 Ryan E. Hart Achieve Your Most Baffling Goals Arunima Raghav in An Idea (by Ingenious Piece) A simple smile can do wonders. Nancy Peckenham in Crow’s Feet Our Stories Theresa Marie Peacemaker Travel Napper 24 IRL About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Luke Burgis 23K Followers Author of “WANTING: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life.” Find more at  read.lukeburgis.com Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Cotten.IO Tim Cotten Follow Oct 3 · 13 min read Save That Time We Burned Down Players’ Houses in Ultima Online Ultima Online is celebrating its 25th anniversary! You know what that means, right?  Story time! In the spirit of #gamedev and inspired by the classic  UO postmortem video by Raph Koster, et al , I thought it’d be fun to share a few stories from the middle years of Ultima Online between my time at EA Redwood Shores and Mythic Fairfax. Today’s tale:  a technical teardown of burning down cheaters’ houses after finding a “criminal” ring of illegal item dupers. A Cheater’s House Burnt to the Ground in Luna, Ultima Online  (2008) Duping: UO’s Zero-Day Exploit When Ultima Online first launched we, the players, found some bugs. By some, I mean,  a lot . And the most valuable, diabolical, worth-building-a-secret-web-forum-to-trade-them sort of bug was:  duping . Being able to duplicate an item, or better,  a bag full of items , was the most advantageous exploit possible in the game. Better than speed-hacking, better than direct damage passthrough — even better than pre-lockdown home invasions. Snidely Whiplash: Notorious UO Gold Duper Some of the beta testers had a secret. Not all of us, of course, but there were certain seedy elements of the beta testing crowd that, rather than follow the virtue of Honesty, chose to hoard their knowledge of exploits rather than report them to the development team. Once UO’s beta ended and the game launched, well, suddenly the economy was hit by a wave of item duping. What was this “carefully guarded” exploit? Abusing areaserv boundaries. Rubberbanding For Fun and Profit I still remember the first time I saw it for myself. It was 1997 and I was running around north of the orc encampment near the town of Cove when I saw some randos doing the weirdest thing ever: they were running back and forth over this annoyingly laggy patch of the game map while dropping little chests on the ground. Now, I knew this particular area as being… the  worst . You see, there was this truly annoying part of the map on that dirt path between the mountains and the orc fortress that was pretty unresponsive and jerky when you walked over it. In fact, if you  *ran*  across it you might get “rubberbanded” — finding yourself losing a few seconds of gameplay time as you bounced back to a previous position before the server “caught up.” (Remind me to tell you all about UO’s server/client interpolation and tick-rate someday!) This was especially bad if a monster, like an inconveniently placed Orc Captain directly south of you, was chasing you and whacked you to death during your pathetically laggy attempt to flee. Imagine my surprise when these two players started excitedly yelling to each other in text (which floated over their heads) that “it worked! omgz!” Yup, they had managed to, as they excitedly bragged, figure out a trick to drop a chest on one side of the “laggy patch” while trying to pick-it-up/hand-it-over to the other player as they were both crossing from one side to the other and now each of them had a copy of the same chest: and its contents. Dupers! Guards! Guards! Seamless Server Boundaries are Hard What I had seen was an exploit based on the “areaserv” boundaries that split up the playable gameworld of Ultima Online. UO never did anything the easy way; after all, its first generation of designers were trying things — inventing entirely new things — that later online games would simply shake their heads at and say “nah, that’s too hard.” For instance: how to load-balance thousands of players in a huge 29,360,128 meter² game map in 1997? Instead of having different “zones” with loading screens or “long, foggy mountain passes”, the UO developers just invented rectangular, seamless “sub-maps” with a (fairly!) invisible method that just let you walk from one side to the other, all while things on the other side were still visible and updating in real-time. UO’s Trammel Areaserv Boundary Definitions  (2012) Thus, each game server (or “shard”) you played on was actually divided into “areaservs” and there was some incredibly well-written “mirror” code that handled communicating gamestate, object conditions, and events from one side of the border to the other. But crossing those borders as a player, sometimes, was noticeably laggy. Aside:  If you look at the areaserv map above you may notice that Britannia should’ve been divided up a bit more carefully so that areaserv boundaries didn’t cut through important/populated gameplay areas… look at poor Buccaneer’s Den:  there’s a reason those hidden, underground tunnels were never fun to PvP in . The areaservs were essentially copying your player character and sending over a bundled message between themselves containing all your info. Once a player crossed the boundary it destroyed the old copy of the player on the initial side. And it wasn’t just players: autonomous mobile objects (mobs) like monsters, animals, and NPCs could cross them as well. (Note: for future exploits those monsters and animals  also  had their own backpacks/inventories players could piggyback exploit attempts on; lots of llama drama.) Naturally, any given bug with the areaserv code represented the greatest probable source of “duping” exploits, especially when coupled with purposefully manipulations of a player’s gamestate before the server backup/shutdown sequence each morning. We Felt Like We Were Playing Whack-a-Mole And after I joined the UO team I learned a few things: The areaserv code is brilliant. It’s been patched and rewritten many times, but by my later years it had gotten pretty “smart” about the way it anticipated player state and pre-serialized objects before boundary transfers even happened. Yet, no matter how good the code became, we developers had introduced so much complexity into the game that sources of dupes abounded regardless — and more often than not they weren’t just areaserv issues anymore. It didn’t help that the game designers could actually write production-level code in Wombat (our own event-based scripting language) that had tons of wrappers for the C++ object management code. It really felt like we were constantly on the backfoot; we couldn’t be very proactive about dupes and depended on player reports & customer service to identify egregious exploits. Then, one day I had this weird idea. UO Didn’t Have a Database There are a couple of things you have to know about UO as it was in the mid-2000’s. Each shard ran a shutdown/backup sequence at a certain time in the early morning hours. (Great for not having to fix memory leaks!) The complete gamestate of each areaserv was dumped from memory into a big binary backup file — by the time I had joined the team they were approaching about 4gb in size. Once the areaservs finished the backups they shut down, restart, and went into standby while the “gameserv” did the same thing. You can think of the gameserv as a server dedicated to coordinating all of the areaservs and passing along logged in players to the right areaserv. The gameserv would shut down, restart, and then instruct each areaserv to load its last known-good backup. Each areaserv would load the binary backup and recreate the previously saved state of the game; it would  also  execute any triggers/hooks in the scripting code for objects/mobiles that said “Do X when the server loads.” [A bunch of other stuff here, including spawning new mobs or daily rares] The areaservs would report all was well and inform the gameserv, and the gameserv would re-announce itself to the login servers that it was available for play. #2 was the biggest problem with trying to find dupes: UO’s gamestate wasn’t in a “database” — there was no way to query for player possessions or objects to find illicit goods. It was 4gbs of binary blob; the data only made sense when loaded back into the game itself. I tried though: I *wanted* to read the binary blobs. I *wanted* to give Customer Service tools to find duped or stolen items. It just wasn’t possible with the tools of the time. Then I remembered #5, and it gave me an idea for a different line of attack. A Global Hash Registry Every dynamic object in UO— whether a mobile, player, or item — is capable of storing both data and scripts on themselves. Scripts don’t hold state once code execution ends, so we would store needed data in “objvars” and attach them to the same objects the scripts were attached to. The scripts themselves contained tons of “triggers” which were event handlers tied to game conditions. As I mentioned in #5 above, one of them had a name that went something like “beforeServerLoad” (heck if I remember the actual name) that specifically executed during the backup loading stage of the areaserv startup process. I thought: “What if we just *marked* the most valuable items in the game whenever they loaded from backup?” I went to the lead engineer,  Supreem , and asked for just one addition to the C++ code and an associated mapping to a “Wombat func” for it: a hashing function (hello crypto!). I wanted to make the gameserv store a running list of “marked” items during the areaserv loading process to identify dupes. A global hash registry. A Plan Unfolds: Invisible Dye Here’s how it worked: Every object in the game, when it loaded, had a hook for a generic “preload” script that would attach itself, execute, and detach itself before it allowed the object to execute any other scripts. This was really useful for cleaning up deployment errors if we did something wrong and it broke any objects in the game during a patch. I added a trigger in the preload script with an “beforeServerLoad” event that checked the item’s type: if it was in a predetermined list of the most expensive/rare types of items, it continued with the plan. If the item didn’t have a “tag” on it, it was created now: an objvar of “string” type that contained a hash of the current time, areaserv, and gameserv id (and some other unique data). This was a really long, random looking piece of text (larger than a 32bit integer) like “29bb546a415ff874e5129549fe8064249e8f1b2996fa2e7d52879d2ec24e06fd”. Once it had a tag (or if it already did), it sent a message to the gameserv (remember, there was only one of these per shard) and asked the gameserv to put it in a lookup registry. If the *tag* already existed in the registry then the item was permanently marked as “I AM DUPED” (again, with an objvar) in plaintext — because Customer Service reps in the god client could see it. The lookup registry only persisted until the areaservs all loaded up, then it cleared out to save memory. The idea was that if a valuable item (worthy of duping) had a unique hash stored on itself as an objvar, then the duping process — whatever it may be — would copy that same objvar’s value. Then there would be two unique objects both holding the same hash. The best time to check for this (in bulk) was during server loads, and that system marked all the objects with an “I AM DUPED” objvar. (Note: my memory may be fuzzy here, and we may have had to tie the script to the onPlayerLoad event as well; I just don’t remember if players were all loaded with the areaserv or whether they were fetched from the backup data on-demand). It was a lot like stamping the rare items with some sort of invisible ink that only fluoresced under certain conditions. So we released the updated code and let it run globally for a few weeks. And then the hunt began. Mwaha. Mwahaha. MWAHAHAHAHAHA! The Corporate Reaction Within a couple of weeks we realized the first phase had worked: we had found a ton of duped rare items, and they were mostly held by the same set of player accounts across multiple game servers. Despite our excitement, this is where we paused: what do we do now? We sat down to talk with Management, Customer Service, and our Community Manager. Management Our producer was stoked to explain what we’d accomplished to the studio general manager. I remember sitting in the meeting with a smile on my face, pleased as punch (as only an arrogant young gamedev can be), just to hear something I wasn’t expecting: “Mmm, I don’t think deleting them all [the duped items] is a good idea, you’ll hurt too many players.” I hadn’t considered that, actually. At all. I was too excited about having accomplished my long held goal to “catch some dupers.” I wanted to chafe and say something, maybe assert that he just  didn’t understand , but reined myself in and after the meeting I went back to the team and told them that we were forbidden from auto-deleting all the dupes. Customer Service So we went to the CS team for data. It was true. It would’ve been a terrible idea. The dupes spread so quickly once they were created that if we just deleted them all out from under all the players who had bought them (with their hard-earned gold) from the dupers we would be affecting a  significant  portion of the playerbase. Sure, some of them would be fine with the “morality” of our action — but on the scale of hundreds or thousands of affected players (per shard) we were just asking for the frustration to cause a wave of quiet quitting. I really shouldn’t have been surprised by this: our studio’s general manager has been running MMOs for a lot longer than I ever had. To make matters more complicated the Customer Service team started asking us hard questions, like: “Exactly how many duped  runic valorite hammers  should a person have before we ban them?” What online game developers open up with every patch. Wait, we were supposed to assign an arbitrary value on how many dupes being held by one person was suspicious? Oh. Oh boy. This was harder than code. It was community design, not just game design. Community Manager Thankfully, we had a level-headed community manager who was used to our over-exuberance. Honestly, they were just used to managing  me  whenever I got too passionate about something. “CS is going to ban them [the actual dupers] anyways. Why not make it an event?” was about how that conversation went. Well, I was the lead live events designer, so… we plotted. Fire! Heh Heh, Fire! We identified the dupers themselves and their storage depos: they had homes full of their duped items and NPC vendors selling them to the players. The “duping ring” stretched across multiple servers, comprised of distinct groups not necessarily working together. They had all evolved the same behaviors though: making tons of UO gold from selling dupes and then selling the UO gold on secondary markets for hard cash. So Adida and I wrote a script, that, once attached to a house, would: Delete the house and all of its contents. All of it. Instantly. Recursively. *poof* Spawn a bunch of immovable “housing rubble” in a predetermined rectangular area that fit the same dimensions the house existed in. It was colored dark black to look like it had soot all over it. Spawn a bunch of eternal “fire fields” amongst the rubble. Create a straw dummy labeled “An Effigy of a Traitor” to place in the middle of the burning rubble. Then, we chose a day, and struck. Customer Service mass banned the dupers on a timer, right before their associated server came online. Then we paused the gameserv/loginserv connection to those same servers and Adida and I ran around (teleported, really) to each housing location, attached the script, watched the fires erupt with joy, and moved on. We did this in batches of related servers so that each “duping ring” didn’t have time to notice they were banned and try to log in on alt-accounts to empty their houses before we could get to them The Community Reacts Confusion! Chaos! Joy! Laughter! Another House Successfully Burnt to the Ground — With Particle Effects Discussion threads popped up on Stratics and  MMORPG.com  almost instantly, full of wonderings and guesses — and a few false suggestions like that a CS employee had been caught up in the banning (false!). Well That’s Neat, But Don’t Do It Again Dozens of homes had been destroyed across the entire multiverse of Ultima Online, and the flames licking the sooty rubble were a visible testimony to our team’s determination to deal with cheaters. It felt fantastic! And we were told not to do it again. Lol. We took some flak for doing something so daringly public to cheating players — even though we made sure not to  identify  them to the other players directly — but still just barely skated by with upper-upper-upper management. Customer Service was instructed to use their discretion to deal with “I AM DUPED” items from then on, and honestly, by now I don’t know if anyone even remembers that the system exists (if it even does). Some Lessons Learned (Satoshi Surprise?) Readers who’ve been exposed to NFTs might notice the eerie resemblance of us marking these rare items (which were non-fungible!) with unique hashes to how blockchain-based Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) work today. Ironically, one thing that our method didn’t work on was *stacks* of objects (fungible items like gold coins). But  Satoshi Nakamoto solved that problem too! The first Bitcoin paper describes a perfect method (online or offline) for validating timestamped events like currency creation . It would’ve helped prevent dupes *and* ensured internal bad actors (with item creation powers) couldn’t just generate a bunch of gold to sell outside the game. Not that I’m saying MMOs need blockchains; but it turns out Proof-of-Work ledger technology had a use case here! (No wonder  Amazon now offers a similar service: QLDB ). Finally, one of the biggest things we learned was having to deal with the economics *after* the fire: especially when players wanted to compete for the now available, very  premium , housing spots. But that’s another story. About the Author Tim “Draconi” Cotten  was the lead game designer of Ultima Online: Stygian Abyss, and when he’s not writing up stories from the wild days of online gaming is working on applying all those hard-won lessons to Metaverse design. Follow him on Twitter  for more Ultima related stories! -- -- 4 More from Cotten.IO Follow Technology - established, emerging, disruptive, speculative Read more from    Cotten.IO Recommended from Medium Rowan Kaiser How To Play Mass Effect — Start With ME2 Sammie Aran Sammie’s Opinion — SSBU: Steve and Minecraft! Sleeping Donut in Donut Lab Donut Punks was released for iOS and got downloaded over 1 million times! THEWEB BAZAR HOW CAN MAKE A GAME DEVELOPER Reynolds Sandbox in The Reynolds Sandbox Media Tips: Drew Scanlon, Clothmapping the World Through Games Draconid in Dota Observatory MDL Chengdu Major Data Analysis Platunovnikita PlanetQuest is a unique exploration, survival and discovery game. Alice Mathew Top 5 Game Development Software About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Tim Cotten 691 Followers Founder of Scrypted Inc: Building interactive digital assets for the Metaverse. < tim@cotten.io > @cottenio Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Good ideas need spaces to take shape before they can take off. So we built Medium to make it easier for more people to read, write and explore ideas together. Thatâs why weâre an open platform 20,000 people use to share their expertise and experiences every day. Itâs also why weâre a publisher, creating the stories 150-million Medium readers are asking for. And why we work with well-known authors, magazines and newspapers to help more people find great thinking that expands their perspective. Download our app so you can read, write, and publish wherever you are. Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Michael Beausoleil Follow Oct 7 · 7 min read · Member-only The Modern Smartphone Started as a Sidekick Mobile phones in the early 2000s took few forms. Most casual users had flip phones, and businesspeople often had PDAs like Blackberrys. Then, iPhone came into existence and accelerated the world toward smartphones. The  Motorola Razr  was cool and the Blackberry was practical, but there was one phone that tried to break the mold and become both: The T-Mobile Sidekick. And for a moment in time, it did just that. All of the  it-celebrities  had one, and the phone did much more than talk and text. -- -- More from Michael Beausoleil Follow User Analytics | Digital & Brand Marketing | Productivity … hoping to explore topics that interest me and find others with similar passions Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Raven Sinclair Help! They Abducted My… iPhone Ryan Banfill America Hoodwinked? Global Challenges Foundation How will disruptive technologies impact global governance? An expert survey Shangping Liu What Are Neodymium Magnets? Micromobility Report New R&D Hub Central to Beam Expansion in Australia Rapiergroup Events 2050: The future of events and exhibitions matchloading Hp laptop elan touchpad driver windows 10 Dave Gershgorn in OneZero Banjo Suspends All Operations in Utah Following OneZero Investigation About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Michael Beausoleil 514 Followers User Analytics | Digital & Brand Marketing | Productivity … hoping to explore topics that interest me and find others with similar passions Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable A portion of your membership will directly support the writers and thinkers you read the most. Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Doug Shapiro Follow Oct 2 · 22 min read Media’s Shift from Growth to Optimization Why it Was Inevitable and What Happens Next Source: Adobe I ran Investor Relations at TimeWarner from 2008–2013, the period when Netflix emerged as a disruptive force in TV. In investor meetings, our CEO Jeff Bewkes was invariably asked about the threat Netflix posed to the TV ecosystem. He would often respond, sometimes in exasperation, “You can’t jam an $80 thing into an $8 thing!” His point was that Netflix, priced at $7.99 at the time, couldn’t replace the entire pay TV bundle because it could never absorb its costs. He was right, of course. A decade or so later, Netflix’s Premium tier costs $20 and it has not subsumed the entire pay TV bundle. But it fundamentally changed the economics of the TV business. Netflix was always willing to operate at much lower margins than traditional TV networks. Fearful of watching their traditional businesses eroded away, all of the major TV networks companies reluctantly followed Netflix into streaming. That meant they were constrained by Netflix’s price umbrella and beholden to its consumer value proposition and associated cost structure: massive investments in content, product, streaming infrastructure and analytics. They reasoned, correctly, that they had little choice; if they were inevitably going to be cannibalized, they better cannibalize themselves. In the last six months, however, the consequences of this transition have become clearer. Increasingly, it looks like Netflix’s cost structure — and therefore the cost structure of the entire streaming business — was predicated on a total addressable market (TAM) that was optimistically high and churn that was optimistically low. Changes in these assumptions will have a material adverse effect on the expected profitability of the business. I’ve written about these topics before, including  One Clear Casualty of the Streaming Wars: Profit  and  Is Streaming a Good Business? . In this follow up, I address three questions: 1) is the slowdown in streaming subs a temporary lull (spoiler: probably not)?; 2) what are the financial implications?; and 3) if you’re a media conglomerate who’s been betting that streaming is a major growth and profit engine, what do you do now? Tl;dr: There is ample evidence that the U.S. streaming market is maturing. Streaming penetration of broadband homes is approaching saturation; the number of streaming services per streaming home appears to be topping out around 4; churn has picked up, implying consumers are actively managing their monthly spend; and there is growing willingness by consumers to trade off watching ads for lower bills, also suggesting price sensitivity. The chief financial implication of this slowdown is that aggregate TV industry profits probably peaked a few years ago: 1) overall TV revenue is probably near a peak, since the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue over the next few years; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment in their streaming businesses, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. What’s a media conglomerate to do? The only choice is to transition back to a focus on optimization and away from subscriber growth. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. Why is Streaming Sub Growth Slowing? Over the last two quarters, growth in streaming subscribers has fallen markedly in the U.S. As everyone who follows the sector knows, Netflix lost subscribers in 1Q and 2Q 2022 in North America (Figure 1), raising the prospect that these markets (the U.S. and Canada) are now saturated. If there is any doubt that this is disappointing, keep in mind that for years Netflix has spoken of a U.S. TAM of “60–90 million” homes (for instance,  here’s  a reference from 1Q 2014). Netflix ended 2Q with about 73 million subscribers in “UCAN.” Assuming the U.S. represents ~90% of Netflix’s North American subs (pro rata with the U.S. and Canadian populations), that implies it is peaking at about 65 million subs in the U.S., the low end of the range. Figure 1. Netflix Subscribers Have Stalled Out in North America Source: Company reports. According to Antenna Data, this slowdown is also playing out industry-wide, as gross adds fall and disconnects rise (Figure 2). Figure 2. The Slowdown is Occurring Across the Industry Source: Antenna Data, Author estimates. A key question is whether the slowdown is a temporary lull or not. If it reflects a reversal of COVID-19-related pull through of demand, growth should rebound once it works through the system. If it reflects market maturation, then it won’t. The data strongly suggest it’s the latter. Reason #1: Streaming Penetration is Near Saturation The growth in streaming subscriptions is a function of two things: growth in the  number of homes that use streaming services  (penetration) and the  number of services per streaming home . As shown in Figure 3, the proportion of U.S. homes that use streaming is approaching saturation. According to Census Bureau data, at the end of last year roughly 94% of U.S. households had broadband service. Based on data from Parks Associates, 82% of them had at least one streaming subscription. How much higher this will go is not clear. As a reference point, pay TV peaked at 87% penetration of all TV households in 2011. Figure 3. U.S. Household Penetration of Broadband and Streaming are Reaching Saturation Source: U.S. Census, OECD, Parks Associates. Point #2: Consumers are Hitting the Wall The number of services per household also seems to be topping out. There are arguably eight “major” general entertainment streaming services: Netflix, Prime Video, Hulu, Disney+, the pending combination of HBO Max and discovery+, Peacock, Paramount+ and Apple TV+ (not to mention ESPN+). Is there room for all of these in the average streaming video household? Intuitively, the answer is no. Traditional pay TV has been overserving consumers for years. (To put it in the language of Clayton Christensen’s disruption theory, pay TV has been delivering consumers a product that is more than “good enough” — the very circumstance that makes an industry ripe for disruption.) From the 1980s through the early 2010s, cable programmers and distributors both benefitted from continually adding channels to the bundle. This justified annual price increases that outstripped the rate of inflation and, with few choices, consumers absorbed the higher prices. As shown in Figure 4, according to Nielsen data, the average number of networks  available  climbed steadily, even as the average number of channels  watched  did not. Every year, people were paying for more networks they didn’t use. Figure 4. Consumers Have Historically Paid for A Lot of TV Networks They Don’t Watch Source: Nielsen Streaming offers consumers much more choice. The key question — which has loomed larger as more streaming options have come to market — is how will consumers react when they are empowered to better align consumption and expenditure? It looks like they are hitting the wall at around four services per home. As shown in Figure 5, based on a bottoms-up tally of all SVOD subscriptions and the estimated number of streaming homes (from Figure 3), at the end of last year, the average streaming household had about 3.7 services. Also note that the growth rate in services per home slowed significantly last year. After a surge of ~35% in 2020, likely spurred on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the launch of several new services (Disney+ in 4Q 2019 and both HBO Max and Peacock in 2Q 2020), services per home grew about 9% in 2021. Figure 5. Post a Pandemic Surge, Growth in Services per Household is Slowing Source: Parks Associates, Author estimates. Point #3: Growth of AVOD and FAST Imply Consumer Price Sensitivity Reports of the death of TV advertising have proven premature. That’s good news for advertising, but also implies high consumer price sensitivity. For years, the growth of streaming was equated with the decline of TV advertising simply because there was much less advertising on streaming services. The largest SVOD providers, Netflix and Prime Video (currently) have no ads, and Hulu, the third largest player, carries a lower ad load than traditional TV (roughly 1/2 as many ad minutes per hour). It was assumed that people were adopting streaming in part because they hated ads. As more viewership steadily migrated over to ad-free or ad-light streaming TV, it seemed inevitable that “premium video” advertising (i.e., advertising in professionally produced linear and streaming TV) would decline. Ironically, it was Hulu’s decision to launch a premium-priced  advertising-free  tier in 2015 that would prove to be a turning point for streaming advertising. After launching the new tier, Hulu found that the majority of new subscribers still chose the ad-supported option and these subscribers’ satisfaction with the ad-supported service increased. It turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. It    turns out that consumers don’t hate ads when the value exchange for watching them is explicit. Since then, there has been a resurgence of advertising on streaming. Today, there are numerous scaled FAST/AVOD services from which to choose (Pluto, Tubi, Roku Channel, Xumo, the Peacock free service) and most of the major SVOD services offer or plan a less expensive, ad-supported option. Discovery+, Hulu, HBO Max and Paramount+ all offer an ad-supported tier and Disney+ and Netflix both plan to launch ad-supported options. According to Magna Global, this year FAST and AVOD will generate close to $15B in advertising revenue (this excludes YouTube, TikTok, Twitch and other short form or user-generated video advertising). Based on Antenna data, for those services that offer an ad-supported tier, in 1Q 2022 about half of new signups took the tradeoff of a lower price in exchange for watching ads (Figure 6). Figure 6. Around Half of Consumers Opt for Ad-Supported Tiers When Given a Choice Source: Antenna Data This is all good news for the broader advertising ecosystem. However, consumers’ willingness to trade off their time and attention for lower subscription fees also provides evidence of their rising price sensitivity as the number of services per home, and the monthly bill, rises. Point #4: High Churn Also Suggests Consumers are Actively Managing Spending Relative to traditional pay TV, consumer switching costs for streaming are far lower, for two reasons: it’s possible to cancel with just a few clicks and the opportunity costs to cancel any individual service are lower when all networks aren’t bundled together. Churn for streaming services is surprisingly high, particularly for what could be called non-core services (i.e., not Netflix or Disney+), as shown in Figure 7. The inference is that consumers are keeping a few core services, but actively churning out the rest depending on what content is available. This behavioral change — toward active management of subscriptions — is another reason to believe that consumers are reaching their saturation point. Figure 7. Churn for “Non-Core” Streaming Services is Much Higher Source: Antenna Data. What Are the Financial Implications of Slowing Streaming Subscriber Growth? The key financial implication of this market maturation is that on current course, aggregate TV industry profits (by which I mean traditional TV plus streaming) probably peaked a few years ago. There are two reasons: 1) the growth in streaming revenue will probably only roughly offset the declines in traditional TV revenue, resulting in flattish overall revenues; and 2) even after the media conglomerates work through the current period of high startup investment, steady-state streaming margins are likely to be much lower than traditional TV. This prognosis is even more challenging for most of the media conglomerates. Other than Disney, none are likely to retain the same share of the streaming market that they have in traditional TV. Total TV Revenue Probably Stays About Flat As shown in Figure 8, I estimate that in 2021, the U.S. market for streaming was about $38 billion, compared to roughly $106 billion for traditional TV affiliate fees and advertising. (Note that the traditional TV figures reflect wholesale revenues that accrue to the TV networks, not retail fees paid by consumers to Comcast, DirecTV, etc.) The point is that, given the size differential, streaming must grow much faster to offset declines in linear TV revenue. Figure 8. Traditional TV Networks Revenue is About 3X Streaming Note: Advertising is national TV advertising, less syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. The good, and somewhat surprising, news, is that traditional TV has continued to grow low single digits over the last few years despite the rise of streaming (Figure 9). That’s been driven by continued growth in affiliate revenue, as affiliate fee pricing has offset pressure on both advertising revenue and pay TV subscribers. Figure 9. Linear TV Has Continued to Grow Despite Streaming Competition… Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Figure 10. …But That Seems Likely to End Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. As shown in Figure 10, however, I expect that period of growth to end. Considering likely recessionary pressures in 2023 and continued declines in linear TV delivery, I expect TV advertising declines to accelerate over the next several years. I also expect affiliate revenue to decline modestly over the period. As shown in Figure 11, based on MoffettNathanson data, even inclusive of virtual MVPDs, as of 2Q 2022 pay TV subscribers were declining at 6% annually and tracking to be down even more by yearend. The question is whether affiliate fee pricing will be enough to offset the unit declines. Probably not. Affiliate fee pricing is highly opaque, but anecdotally rates are growing about 5–6% per year. An important indicator is the buyers themselves. As shown in Figure 12, total video programming spending started to decline on a year-over-year basis for both Comcast and Charter in 4Q 2021, suggesting that affiliate fee increases are no longer sufficient to make up for the decline in subs. Figure 11. Pay TV Subs are Declining 5% Y/Y Source: MoffettNathanson Figure 12. Declining Programming Costs for Comcast and Charter Foreshadow Declining Affiliate Revenue for Programmers *Normalized for sports programming rebates in 1Q-3Q 2020 due to COVID-related cancellations. Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Conversely, streaming should keep growing at a rapid clip. I estimate that streaming revenue will grow about 12% annually between 2021–2025. This estimate is driven by a few variables: I assume streaming households grow slightly faster than household formation (as penetration continues to climb slowly); services per streaming household grows mid single-digits each year (to reach about 4.5); service providers do not see much growth in effective subscription prices (as a mix shift toward lower-priced advertising supported tiers offset price increases); and streaming advertising grows mid-teens. Overshadowing the specific assumptions underlying these forecasts, however, is the simple math: as mentioned before, given the relative sizes of the traditional pay TV and streaming revenue pools, streaming has to grow almost 3X as fast as pay TV declines for aggregate TV revenues to stay flat. As shown in Figure 13, I expect that will be the outcome: total TV revenues remain relatively stagnant over the next few years as growth in streaming offsets pay TV revenue declines. Figure 13. Aggregate TV Industry Revenues Will Likely Stay About Flat Note: National TV Advertising excludes syndication. Streaming advertising includes AVOD/FAST, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Source: Magna Global, Author estimates. Streaming Margins Will be Substantially Lower All of the media conglomerates are currently incurring heavy investment spending to support their streaming businesses. But even once they work through this period, steady-state streaming margins will likely be much lower than traditional TV. Figure 14: Historically, TV Networks Margins are in the Mid-High 30%-Range Note: Disney is on a September fiscal year and Fox is on a June fiscal year. 2019 precedes push into streaming. Source: Company reports. I wrote about streaming margins in detail in a recent essay ( Is Streaming a Good Business? ), but here’s the basic idea. Historically, TV networks margins were 20–40%, among the highest in the broader economy (Figure 14). Streaming margins are unlikely to reach the low end of this range. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub It’s possible to see why by examining Netflix’s financials. Now that Netflix has stopped growing in North America, it is finally possible to determine with some degree of confidence the steady-state unit economics of a Netflix sub. Those economics are daunting for almost every other streamers. As shown in Figure 15, despite its massive scale, I estimate that Netflix spends about $10–11 in monthly operating costs per subscriber. Importantly, ~$5 of this is non-programming spending. Figure 15. Netflix Spends About $11 per Sub per Month in North America Source: Company reports, Author estimates. Note: Reflects content amortization, not cash costs. As I explained in more detail in that essay, the media companies are likely incurring at least as large, if not larger, non-programming unit operating costs as Netflix. One reason is the higher churn mentioned above; for a given level of subscriber acquisition cost (SAC), higher churn means a shorter customer life and, therefore, a higher monthly amortization of SAC (or phrased differently, higher ongoing marketing costs). This implies that the media conglomerates are spending $6–8 monthly per subscriber  even before any content costs . For many of them, that alone approaches or exceeds their ARPU (Figure 16). Assuming comparable spending on content as Netflix, on the current trajectory it will be hard for most of the media companies to turn a profit, even at scale. Figure 16. Most Streamers’ Costs > ARPU Source: Company reports, author estimates. Note: All as reported as of most recently-reported quarter, with the following exceptions: HBO Max from 1Q22 AT&T earnings report; Peacock based on commentary in Comcast 4Q21 earnings that service had 24.5MM monthly active accounts (MAA) and 9MM paying subs, with ARPU for paying subs “approaching $10” — as of 2Q22, it had 27MM MAA and 13MM paying subs; Discovery+ based on guidance last provided December 2020, assuming mix of 50/50 ad-free and ad-lite plans. Other Than Disney, No One Media Company is Holding Share So, on current course, the aggregate TV profit pool will likely be smaller in five years than it was a few years ago (before the current period of heavy investment spending). But not everyone will fare equally. As shown in Figure 17, Disney is the only conglomerate that is retaining share in the transition to streaming. Figure 17. Traditional and Streaming TV Revenue Share, 2021 Note: Traditional revenue includes network affiliate and advertising revenue. Streaming includes SVOD and AVOD/FAST revenue, but excludes short form (YouTube, TikTok, etc.). Assumes no directly attributable revenue for Amazon Prime Video. Represents Fiscal 2021 for Disney (September FY) and Fox (June FY). Source: Company reports, Author estimates. What Now? The Transition to Optimization from Growth Above, I used the phrase “on current course” a few times. How can the industry change course? Well, to state the obvious, it needs to raise revenue, lower costs, reduce churn, extend the tail on linear TV and figure out how to extract the most value possible from each content asset. In other words, it needs to shift its focus back to  optimization  and away from streaming subscriber  growth . That has long been the essence of the entertainment business. This framing helps explain some of the recent industry news and predict what’s likely to happen next. What Do I Mean by Optimization? Every business is a multivariate optimization problem. But media businesses inherently have more variables than most (Figure 18). Content is an information good, which means it has very high fixed costs and low marginal costs. Since pricing is therefore not constrained by marginal cost, it has wide pricing flexibility. Its value is primarily emotional, not functional, so there is a wide variation in consumer willingness-to-pay. Like other information goods, it is extremely flexible, in the sense that many price discrimination or “versioning” models are possible (bundled/unbundled; windowed/”day-and-date;” rent/sell; one-time transaction/ongoing subscription; ad-free/ad-supported/ad-light; full-featured/no frills, etc.). Successful IP is evergreen and extensible, creating opportunities for sequels, spinoffs and reboots and multi-channel, multi-modal exploitation (such as into other forms of media, games, merchandise or events). Many providers are vertically integrated and global, so they must choose whether to sell wholesale or D2C, whether to retain or license rights, which markets to enter, and so on. Digitization enhances all of these elements, enabling an almost infinite combination of price and features. Figure 18. The Media Business Has a Lot of Levers Source: Author The Media Business Has Always Been About Optimization — Until Recently The history of the media business is about finding new ways to squeeze more value out of a given content asset. A good example is the windowing of a film. Traditionally, films cycled through several windows in the 8–10 years after premiering: theatrical, then home entertainment (rental and sell through), then premium TV (HBO, Netflix, Showtime, etc.), then free broadcast TV or basic cable networks, then back to premium TV, then finally bundled and licensed as “library” content to free TV, premium TV, SVOD or AVOD yet again. Each window offered consumers different tradeoffs, such as between time delay, rent or purchase, subscription or one-time, bundled or unbundled, uncensored or censored, paid or “free” (advertising-supported). In recent years, media companies have moved away from optimization as they focused foremost on the growth of their streaming services In recent years, media companies have moved away from this practice of optimization as they prioritized the growth of their streaming services. To drive subscribers, they offered their streaming services at low prices (often, substantially lower than they generate in wholesale affiliate fees for the same content packaged into traditional linear networks); collapsed or shrunk theatrical windows; aggressively ramped up content spend; reallocated content budgets away from high-margin linear networks to low-margin streaming services; and curtailed or stopped licensing content to third-parties. With growing evidence that the streaming business will be neither as large nor as profitable as many hoped, the needle is swinging back. This is the point that WarnerBros Discovery (WBD) executive JB Perrette was making when he presented the slides below (Figure 19) on the company’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings webcast. Seduced by the promise of streaming, the industry had strayed from its roots. Now, it has no choice but to go back. Figure 19. Optimization vs Streaming Growth-at-all-Costs Source: WarnerBros. Discovery What Does Optimization Mean in Practice? In recent months, there have been numerous examples of this shift back to optimization and away from streaming subscriber growth-at-all-costs. Here’s a non-exhaustive list: Netflix’s announced  move into the advertising business Netflix’s efforts to monetize  password sharing Netflix cutting  back on comedy special payouts Speculation  that Netflix will move away from its binge model WBD’s statement that it will “ fully embrace theatrical ” Disney  raising prices on Disney+ and Hulu Disney reportedly exploring an  Amazon-Prime like service  (or what Matthew Ball years ago referred to as  Disney-as-a-Service ). Reports that WBD will  repurpose HBO originals on TNT and tbs . Reports that NBCU is seeking to  cut $1 billion from its networks budgets  and is contemplating  giving back the 10PM hour on NBC to its affiliates . I expect we’ll see a lot more of these kinds of announcements and speculation, categorized in four areas: monetization, retention, cost and portfolio. In addition to the examples above, here’s a quick sketch of what each may mean in practice. Monetization Aside from Netflix and Disney, it is a matter of debate to what degree the other streamers have much pricing power. But there are other ways to boost revenue besides price hikes: Advertising-supported tiers open up a large number of ways to drive revenue, including ad loads, advertiser mix, sponsorships, new advertising formats and data-driven targeting and attribution products; Offering premium tiers, which might include enhanced features like early access to content, access to talent or adjacent products and services, like merchandise, membership clubs or events; Launching  family sharing plans , as Netflix has started outside the U.S.; Solidifying theatrical windows; Selective content licensing to third parties, especially in non-core jurisdictions or downstream windows; Acquisition and Retention A slowdown in subscriber net additions will increase the importance of retaining existing subscribers and a more granular understanding of LTV/CAC (customer lifetime value/cost of subscriber acquisition). This will require service providers to better understand why subscribers initially join, why they churn and LTV/CAC within different acquisition channels. Are certain cohorts more likely to churn? Are there different churn profiles depending on acquisition channel? Do promotions work? Do fans of certain content genres have different propensities to churn? How does the scheduling of content affect churn? Depending on the answers to these kinds of questions, possible actions may include: Tailoring acquisition campaigns to different subscriber cohorts; A more purposeful approach to the timing of tentpole content releases and movement away from binge models; Creating adjunct products, services or content around consumers’ favorite IP to keep them engaged year-round; More concerted bundling efforts between affiliated services (like Disney’s bundle of Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+); Bundling partnerships between unaffiliated streaming services (Peacock and Paramount+?) or with distributors (such as bundling with wireless or broadband service or enabling connected TV providers to sell service bundles); Making it easier for “serial churners” to cycle off and on; And offering incentives for subscribers to enter longer-term relationships, like  this HBO Max promotion . Cost, Including Content Optimization Any business reducing its growth forecasts will naturally turn its attention to its cost structure. Beyond typical “cost out” programs, we expect media companies to re-evaluate their largest discretionary expenditure: content. Not just tightening up content budgets or shifting toward lower-cost programming (e.g., more unscripted), but also approaching content optimization more analytically. Content optimization consists of determining the optimal window, channel and business model for each content asset along an array of parameters, such as subscriber acquisition and retention, aggregate revenue (including subscription, advertising, licensing, box office and adjacent revenue streams like merchandise) and production and marketing costs. That may mean repurposing streaming content on linear (as WBD is speculated to be considering). It may also mean less absolutism about third-party licensing. Until recently, if a big media company licensed content to a third party it was interpreted as a lack of confidence or commitment to their own streaming service. True content optimization will dictate that sometimes the profit-maximizing decision will be to license a given show or movie. It’s potentially a rich vein, but it will be hard to mine. Most media companies will need to invest in data management, analytics and business intelligence tools and the data scientists who will make this all work. Besides the heavy technical lift of aggregating data and making it accessible and useful to decision makers, media companies will need to change longstanding practices. Many media companies are organized in silos, each with its own GMs, development executives, budgets and financial targets. Different executives often run different cable networks; linear networks and streaming services may have different management; and movie studios are often run separately from TV. Objectively evaluating the best window or channel for a content asset will require both a holistic view across distribution outlets and the authority to decide. It will also require a much heavier reliance on data. Historically, most media companies were wholesalers, so they didn’t have much 1st party data, and many functional areas aren’t accustomed to using it. It also poses a cultural challenge. Hollywood is self-selecting for executives who have high regard for their own intuition. Many will resist the idea of augmenting that intuition with data. Portfolio As mentioned above, over the last decade the TV business has transitioned from one of limited consumer choice to almost unlimited choice. This necessitates a change in strategy. When consumers had little choice but to take the pay TV bundle and distributors were willing to keep adding networks to the bundle, it made sense for media companies to keep launching new networks. Today, when consumers can choose which services they subscribe to, it makes sense to have the fewest number of high-quality, logically distinct networks/brands as possible. A streaming service has to have enough brand recognition and content heft that consumers consider it indispensable. Also, as the traditional pay TV business continues to decline in both subscriptions and viewership, many existing networks will become less viable. The logical outcome is that secondary and tertiary brands will be re-branded to create a more obvious linkage with the primary streaming brand, divested or even shut down. Optimization is the Only Choice On WBD’s recent 2Q 2022 earnings call, management laid out its intention to prioritize profits over streaming sub growth. A lot of the subsequent commentary was critical, arguing that WBD was acting out of weakness, hampered by its debt load and HBO Max’s relatively sub-scale competitive position. In my opinion, however, it is not only the right strategy, it is the only viable one. TV is a textbook example of what Christensen called low-end disruption: an industry overserves its customers with a product that is more than “good enough” at too-high a price; a new entrant comes in with an “inferior” product that nevertheless attracts substantial demand; the new entrant systematically moves up-market to offer successively higher quality (first library content, then kids, then first run syndication and finally original TV and movies), siphoning off more demand in the process; and then the incumbents eventually succumb to the innovator’s dilemma, launching their own competing offerings and cannibalizing themselves. Like any other industry subject to low-end disruption, it has been inevitable for years that the profit pool of TV would decline. Now it’s becoming clear and the industry is adjusting accordingly. Optimization isn’t sexy; unlike blowing out sub estimates, the Street won’t pay for it until it shows up in the financials. It’s also not the most consumer-friendly approach. Content will be available in different places, in different windows, with different features and at different prices. But for an industry grappling with a structurally-smaller profit pool, it’s the only choice. -- -- 1 More from Doug Shapiro Follow Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Brett Johnson Open The Mic Newsletter — Podcast News Jbetancourt Fake News Major Writing Assignment Rani Yadav-Ranjan Fake news is not new! Ajit Pai The Need for Speed Aya Schechner CEO Snippets: David Walmsley, Editor-in-Chief of The Globe and Mail Andrey Abasin Epoch Media Casts Wider Net to Spread Its Message Online Kathryn Fraser The Symbol of Survival: The Media Impact on Kalief Browder Ameera AlSaid in Doha News Will Qatar’s print media survive COVID-19? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Doug Shapiro 462 Followers Media and stuff. BCG. Former Turner/WarnerMedia; II-ranked Wall Street analyst. Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 12 min read Medium Terms of Service Effective: September 1, 2020 You can see our previous Terms  here . Thanks for using Medium. Our mission is to deepen people’s understanding of the world and spread ideas that matter. These Terms of Service (“ Terms ”) apply to your access to and use of the websites, mobile applications and other online products and services (collectively, the “ Services ”) provided by A Medium Corporation (“ Medium ” or “ we ”).  By clicking your consent (e.g. “Continue,” “Sign-in,” or “Sign-up,”) or by using our Services, you agree to these Terms, including the mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver in the Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration Section. Our  Privacy Policy  explains how we collect and use your information while our  Rules  outline your responsibilities when using our Services. By using our Services, you’re agreeing to be bound by these Terms and our Rules. Please see our  Privacy Policy  for information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you. If you have any questions about these Terms or our Services, please contact us at  legal@medium.com . Your Account and Responsibilities You’re responsible for your use of the Services and any content you provide, including compliance with applicable laws. Content on the Services may be protected by others’ intellectual property rights. Please don’t copy, upload, download, or share content unless you have the right to do so. Your use of the Services must comply with our Rules. You may need to register for an account to access some or all of our Services. Help us keep your account protected. Safeguard your password to the account, and keep your account information current. We recommend that you do not share your password with others. If you’re accepting these Terms and using the Services on behalf of someone else (such as another person or entity), you represent that you’re authorized to do so, and in that case the words “you” or “your” in these Terms include that other person or entity. To use our Services, you must be at least 13 years old. If you use the Services to access, collect, or use personal information about other Medium users (“Personal Information”), you agree to do so in compliance with applicable laws. You further agree not to sell any Personal Information, where the term “sell” has the meaning given to it under applicable laws. For Personal Information you provide to us (e.g. as a Newsletter Editor), you represent and warrant that you have lawfully collected the Personal Information and that you or a third party has provided all required notices and collected all required consents before collecting the Personal Information. You further represent and warrant that Medium’s use of such Personal Information in accordance with the purposes for which you provided us the Personal Information will not violate, misappropriate or infringe any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) and will not cause us to violate any applicable laws. User Content on the Services Medium may review your conduct and content for compliance with these Terms and our Rules, and reserves the right to remove any violating content. Medium reserves the right to delete or disable content alleged to be infringing the intellectual property rights of others, and to terminate accounts of repeat infringers. We respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement if they comply with the law; please report such notices using our  Copyright Policy . Rights and Ownership You retain your rights to any content you submit, post or display on or through the Services.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing, by submitting, posting, or displaying content on or through the Services, you grant Medium a nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your content in all media formats and distribution methods now known or later developed on the Services. Medium needs this license because you own your content and Medium therefore can’t display it across its various surfaces (i.e., mobile, web) without your permission. This type of license also is needed to distribute your content across our Services. For example, you post a story on Medium. It is reproduced as versions on both our website and app, and distributed to multiple places within Medium, such as the homepage or reading lists. A modification might be that we show a snippet of your work (and not the full post) in a preview, with attribution to you. A derivative work might be a list of top authors or quotes on Medium that uses portions of your content, again with full attribution. This license applies to our Services only, and does not grant us any permissions outside of our Services. So long as you comply with these Terms, Medium gives you a limited, personal, non-exclusive, and non-assignable license to access and use our Services. The Services are protected by copyright, trademark, and other US and foreign laws. These Terms don’t grant you any right, title or interest in the Services, other users’ content on the Services, or Medium trademarks, logos or other brand features. Separate and apart from the content you submit, post or display on our Services, we welcome feedback, including any comments, ideas and suggestions you have about our Services. We may use this feedback for any purpose, in our sole discretion, without any obligation to you. We may treat feedback as nonconfidential. We may stop providing the Services or any of its features within our sole discretion. We also retain the right to create limits on use and storage and may remove or limit content distribution on the Services. Termination You’re free to stop using our Services at any time. We reserve the right to suspend or terminate your access to the Services with or without notice. Transfer and Processing Data In order for us to provide our Services, you agree that we may process, transfer and store information about you in the US and other countries, where you may not have the same rights and protections as you do under local law. Indemnification To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you will indemnify, defend and hold harmless Medium, and our officers, directors, agents, partners and employees (individually and collectively, the  “Medium Parties” ) from and against any losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, expenses or costs ( “Claims” ) arising out of or related to your violation, misappropriation or infringement of any rights of another (including intellectual property rights or privacy rights) or your violation of the law. You agree to promptly notify Medium Parties of any third-party Claims, cooperate with Medium Parties in defending such Claims and pay all fees, costs and expenses associated with defending such Claims (including attorneys’ fees). You also agree that the Medium Parties will have control of the defense or settlement, at Medium’s sole option, of any third-party Claims. Disclaimers — Service is “As Is” Medium aims to give you great Services but there are some things we can’t guarantee. Your use of our Services is at your sole risk. You understand that our Services and any content posted or shared by users on the Services are provided “as is” and “as available” without warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, title, and non-infringement. In addition, Medium doesn’t represent or warrant that our Services are accurate, complete, reliable, current or error-free. No advice or information obtained from Medium or through the Services will create any warranty or representation not expressly made in this paragraph. Medium may provide information about third-party products, services, activities or events, or we may allow third parties to make their content and information available on or through our Services (collectively, “ Third-Party Content ”). We do not control or endorse, and we make no representations or warranties regarding, any Third-Party Content. You access and use Third-Party Content at your own risk. Some locations don’t allow the disclaimers in this paragraph and so they might not apply to you. Limitation of Liability We don’t exclude or limit our liability to you where it would be illegal to do so; this includes any liability for the gross negligence, fraud or intentional misconduct of Medium or the other Medium Parties in providing the Services. In countries where the following types of exclusions aren’t allowed, we’re responsible to you only for losses and damages that are a reasonably foreseeable result of our failure to use reasonable care and skill or our breach of our contract with you. This paragraph doesn’t affect consumer rights that can’t be waived or limited by any contract or agreement. In countries where exclusions or limitations of liability are allowed, Medium and Medium Parties won’t be liable for: (a)   Any indirect, consequential, exemplary, incidental, punitive, or special damages, or any loss of use, data or profits, under any legal theory, even if Medium or the other Medium Parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages. (b)   Other than for the types of liability we can’t limit by law (as described in this section), we limit the total liability of Medium and the other Medium Parties for any claim arising out of or relating to these Terms or our Services, regardless of the form of the action, to the greater of $50.00 USD or the amount paid by you to use our Services. Resolving Disputes; Binding Arbitration We want to address your concerns without needing a formal legal case. Before filing a claim against Medium, you agree to contact us and attempt to resolve the claim informally by sending a written notice of your claim by email at legal@medium.com or by certified mail addressed to A Medium Corporation, P.O. Box 602, San Francisco, CA 94104. The notice must (a) include your name, residence address, email address, and telephone number; (b) describe the nature and basis of the claim; and (c) set forth the specific relief sought. Our notice to you will be sent to the email address associated with your online account and will contain the information described above. If we can’t resolve matters within thirty (30) days after any notice is sent, either party may initiate a formal proceeding. Please read the following section carefully because it requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with Medium and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us, unless you opt out of arbitration by following the instructions set forth below. No class or representative actions or arbitrations are allowed under this arbitration provision. In addition, arbitration precludes you from suing in court or having a jury trial. (a)  No Representative Actions. You and Medium agree that any dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services is personal to you and Medium and that any dispute will be resolved solely through individual action, and will not be brought as a class arbitration, class action or any other type of representative proceeding. (b)  Arbitration of Disputes.  Except for small claims disputes in which you or Medium seeks to bring an individual action in small claims court located in the county where you reside or disputes in which you or Medium seeks injunctive or other equitable relief for the alleged infringement or misappropriation of intellectual property,  you and Medium waive your rights to a jury trial and to have any other dispute arising out of or related to these Terms or our Services, including claims related to privacy and data security, (collectively, “ Disputes ”) resolved in court . All Disputes submitted to JAMS will be resolved through confidential, binding arbitration before one arbitrator. Arbitration proceedings will be held in San Francisco, California unless you’re a consumer, in which case you may elect to hold the arbitration in your county of residence. For purposes of this section a “ consumer ” means a person using the Services for personal, family or household purposes. You and Medium agree that Disputes will be held in accordance with the JAMS Streamlined Arbitration Rules and Procedures (“ JAMS Rules ”). The most recent version of the JAMS Rules are available on the  JAMS website  and are incorporated into these Terms by reference. You either acknowledge and agree that you have read and understand the JAMS Rules or waive your opportunity to read the JAMS Rules and waive any claim that the JAMS Rules are unfair or should not apply for any reason. (c) You and Medium agree that these Terms affect interstate commerce and that the enforceability of this section will be substantively and procedurally governed by the Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1,  et seq . (the “ FAA ”), to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law. As limited by the FAA, these Terms and the JAMS Rules, the arbitrator will have exclusive authority to make all procedural and substantive decisions regarding any Dispute and to grant any remedy that would otherwise be available in court, including the power to determine the question of arbitrability. The arbitrator may conduct only an individual arbitration and may not consolidate more than one individual’s claims, preside over any type of class or representative proceeding or preside over any proceeding involving more than one individual. (d) The arbitration will allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the Dispute. The arbitrator, Medium, and you will maintain the confidentiality of any arbitration proceedings, judgments and awards, including information gathered, prepared and presented for purposes of the arbitration or related to the Dispute(s) therein. The arbitrator will have the authority to make appropriate rulings to safeguard confidentiality, unless the law provides to the contrary. The duty of confidentiality doesn’t apply to the extent that disclosure is necessary to prepare for or conduct the arbitration hearing on the merits, in connection with a court application for a preliminary remedy, or in connection with a judicial challenge to an arbitration award or its enforcement, or to the extent that disclosure is otherwise required by law or judicial decision. (e) You and Medium agree that for any arbitration you initiate, you will pay the filing fee (up to a maximum of $250 if you are a consumer), and Medium will pay the remaining JAMS fees and costs. For any arbitration initiated by Medium, Medium will pay all JAMS fees and costs. You and Medium agree that the state or federal courts of the State of California and the United States sitting in San Francisco, California have exclusive jurisdiction over any appeals and the enforcement of an arbitration award. (f)  Any Dispute must be filed within one year after the relevant claim arose; otherwise, the Dispute is permanently barred, which means that you and Medium will not have the right to assert the claim. (g)  You have the right to opt out of binding arbitration within 30 days of the date you first accepted the terms of this section by sending an email of your request to  yourfriends@medium.com . In order to be effective, the opt-out notice must include your full name and address and clearly indicate your intent to opt out of binding arbitration. By opting out of binding arbitration, you are agreeing to resolve Disputes in accordance with the next section regarding “Governing Law and Venue.” (h) If any portion of this section is found to be unenforceable or unlawful for any reason, (1) the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall be severed from these Terms; (2) severance of the unenforceable or unlawful provision shall have no impact whatsoever on the remainder of this section or the parties’ ability to compel arbitration of any remaining claims on an individual basis pursuant to this section; and (3) to the extent that any claims must therefore proceed on a class, collective, consolidated, or representative basis, such claims must be litigated in a civil court of competent jurisdiction and not in arbitration, and the parties agree that litigation of those claims shall be stayed pending the outcome of any individual claims in arbitration. Further, if any part of this section is found to prohibit an individual claim seeking public injunctive relief, that provision will have no effect to the extent such relief is allowed to be sought out of arbitration, and the remainder of this section will be enforceable. Governing Law and Venue These Terms and any dispute that arises between you and Medium will be governed by California law except for its conflict of law principles. Any dispute between the parties that’s not subject to arbitration or can’t be heard in small claims court will be resolved in the state or federal courts of California and the United States, respectively, sitting in San Francisco, California. Some countries have laws that require agreements to be governed by the local laws of the consumer’s country. This paragraph doesn’t override those laws. Amendments We may make changes to these Terms from time to time. If we make changes, we’ll provide you with notice of them by sending an email to the email address associated with your account, offering an in-product notification, or updating the date at the top of these Terms. Unless we say otherwise in our notice, the amended Terms will be effective immediately, and your continued use of our Services after we provide such notice will confirm your acceptance of the changes. If you don’t agree to the amended Terms, you must stop using our Services. Severability If any provision or part of a provision of these Terms is unlawful, void or unenforceable, that provision or part of the provision is deemed severable from these Terms and does not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Miscellaneous Medium’s failure to exercise or enforce any right or provision of these Terms will not operate as a waiver of such right or provision. These Terms, and the terms and policies listed in the Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You Section, reflect the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede all prior agreements, statements and understandings of the parties. The section titles in these Terms are for convenience only and have no legal or contractual effect. Use of the word “including” will be interpreted to mean “including without limitation.” Except as otherwise provided herein, these Terms are intended solely for the benefit of the parties and are not intended to confer third-party beneficiary rights upon any other person or entity. You agree that communications and transactions between us may be conducted electronically. Other Terms and Policies that May Apply to You -  Medium Rules -  Partner Program Terms -  Membership Terms of Service -  Username Policy -  Custom Domains Terms of Service -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium SheHacksPurple in DevOps Dudes Security is Everybody’s Job — Part 1 — DevSecOps SkyNet Tools Vulnnr — Vulnerability Scanner & Auto Exploiter itSynergy 5 Cybersecurity Misconceptions That Need to Be Debunked phbits OpenSSL Root Certificate Authority Afolic Setting up Burpsuite for your web penetration testing Shashwat Singh Critical Controls to Secure OpenSSH Installation Auditchain AUDITCHAIN ANNOUNCES PHASE 2 BOUNTY CAMPAIGN! Cyrex Security Explained: Fear the Peer-to-Peer About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in Medium Policy Medium Follow Sep 1, 2020 · 11 min read Medium Privacy Policy Effective date: March 24, 2022 You can see our previous Privacy Policy  here . This Privacy Policy explains how A Medium Corporation ( “ Medium ,”   “ we ,”  or  “ us ” ) collects, uses, and discloses information about you. This Privacy Policy applies when you use our websites, mobile applications, and other online products and services that link to this Privacy Policy (collectively, our  “ Services ”), contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of this policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website or providing you with a notification). We encourage you to review this Privacy Policy regularly to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. CONTENTS Collection of Information Use of Information Sharing of Information Third-Party Embeds Transfer of Information to the United States and Other Countries Your Choices Your California Privacy Rights Additional Disclosures for Individuals in Europe Contact Us COLLECTION OF INFORMATION Information You Provide to Us We collect information you provide directly to us. For example, you share information directly with us when you create an account, fill out a form, submit or post content through our Services, purchase a membership, communicate with us via third-party platforms, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us. The types of personal information we may collect include your name, display name, username, bio, email address, business information, your content, including your avatar image, photos, posts, responses, and series published by you, and any other information you choose to provide. In some cases, we may also collect information you provide about others, such as when you purchase a Medium membership as a gift for someone. We will use this information to fulfill your request and will not send communications to your contacts unrelated to your request, unless they separately consent to receive communications from us or otherwise engage with us. We do not collect payment information through our Services. We rely on third parties to process payments in connection with our Services. Any information you provide to facilitate such a payment is subject to the third-party payment processor’s privacy policy, and we encourage you to review this policy before you provide any information to the payment processor. Information We Collect Automatically When You Interact with Us In some instances, we automatically collect certain information, including: Activity Information:  We collect information about your activity on our Services, such as your reading history and when you share links, follow users, highlight posts, and clap for posts. Transactional Information:  When you purchase a membership, we collect information about the transaction, such as subscription details, purchase price, and the date of the transaction. Device and Usage Information:  We collect information about how you access our Services, including data about the device and network you use, such as your hardware model, operating system version, mobile network, IP address, unique device identifiers, browser type, and app version. We also collect information about your activity on our Services, such as access times, pages viewed, links clicked, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services. Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:  We use tracking technologies, such as cookies and web beacons, to collect information about you. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that we use on our Services and in our emails to help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage. We also work with third party analytics providers who use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers, and other technologies to collect information about your use of our Services and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in mobile apps, and links clicked. This information may be used by Medium and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver content targeted to your interests on our Services, and better understand your online activity. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see Your Choices below. Information We Collect from Other Sources We obtain information from third-party sources. For example, we may collect information about you from social networks, accounting services providers and data analytics providers. Additionally, if you create or log into your Medium account through a third-party platform (such as Apple, Facebook, Google, or Twitter), we will have access to certain information from that platform, such as your name, lists of friends or followers, birthday, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such platform. Information We Derive We may derive information or draw inferences about you based on the information we collect. For example, we may make inferences about your location based on your IP address or infer reading preferences based on your reading history. USE OF INFORMATION We use the information we collect to provide, maintain, and improve our Services, which includes publishing and distributing user-generated content, personalizing the posts you see and operating our metered paywall. We also use the information we collect to: Create and maintain your Medium account; Process transactions and send related information, such as confirmations, receipts, and user experience surveys; Send you technical notices, security alerts, and support and administrative messages; Respond to your comments and questions and provide customer service; Communicate with you about new content, products, services, and features offered by Medium and provide other news and information we think will interest you (see Your Choices below for information about how to opt out of these communications at any time); Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; Detect, investigate, and prevent security incidents and other malicious, deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity and protect the rights and property of Medium and others; Debug to identify and repair errors in our Services; Comply with our legal and financial obligations; and Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected. SHARING OF INFORMATION We share personal information in the following circumstances or as otherwise described in this policy: We share personal information with other users of the Services. For example, if you use our Services to publish content, post comments or send private notes, certain information about you will be visible to others, such as your name, photo, bio, other account information you may provide, and information about your activities on our Services (e.g., your followers and who you follow, recent posts, claps, highlights, and responses). We share personal information with vendors, service providers, and consultants that need access to personal information in order to perform services for us, such as companies that assist us with web hosting, storage, and other infrastructure, analytics, payment processing, fraud prevention and security, customer service, communications, and marketing. We may disclose personal information if we believe that disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements. If we are going to disclose your personal information in response to legal process, we will give you notice so you can challenge it (for example by seeking court intervention), unless we are prohibited by law or believe doing so may endanger others or cause illegal conduct. We will object to legal requests for information about users of our Services that we believe are improper. We may share personal information if we believe that your actions are inconsistent with our  user agreements or policies , if we believe that you have violated the law, or if we believe it is necessary to protect the rights, property, and safety of Medium, our users, the public, or others. We share personal information with our lawyers and other professional advisors where necessary to obtain advice or otherwise protect and manage our business interests. We may share personal information in connection with, or during negotiations concerning, any merger, sale of company assets, financing, or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company. Personal information is shared between and among Medium and our current and future parents, affiliates, and subsidiaries and other companies under common control and ownership. We share personal information with your consent or at your direction. We also share aggregated or de-identified information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. THIRD-PARTY EMBEDS Medium does not host some of the content displayed on our Services. Users have the ability to post content that is actually hosted by a third party, but is embedded in our pages (an  “ Embed ” ). When you interact with an Embed, it can send information about your interaction to the hosting third party just as if you were visiting the third party’s site directly. For example, when you load a Medium post page with a YouTube video Embed and watch the video, YouTube receives information about your activity, such as your IP address and how much of the video you watch. Medium does not control what information third parties collect through Embeds or what they do with the information. This Privacy Policy does not apply to information collected through Embeds. The privacy policy belonging to the third party hosting the Embed applies to any information the Embed collects, and we recommend you review that policy before interacting with the Embed. TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES Medium is headquartered in the United States, and we have operations and service providers in the United States and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your personal information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide levels of data protection that are equivalent to those of your home jurisdiction. For example, we transfer personal data to Amazon Web Services, one of our service providers that processes personal information for us in various data center locations across the globe, including those listed  here . We will take steps to ensure that your personal information receives an adequate level of protection in the jurisdictions in which we process it. YOUR CHOICES Account Information You may access, correct, delete and export your account information at any time by logging into the Services and navigating to the  Settings page . Please note that if you choose to delete your account, we may continue to retain certain information about you as required by law or for our legitimate business purposes. Cookies Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually adjust your browser settings to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that removing or rejecting cookies could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. Communications Preferences You may opt out of receiving certain communications from us, such as digests, newsletters, and activity notifications, by following the instructions in those communications or through your account’s  Settings page . If you opt out, we may still send you administrative emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations. Mobile Push Notifications With your consent, we may send push notifications to your mobile device. You can deactivate these messages at any time by changing the notification settings on your mobile device. YOUR CALIFORNIA PRIVACY RIGHTS The California Consumer Privacy Act or  “ CCPA ”  (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.100 et seq.) affords consumers residing in California certain rights with respect to their personal information. If you are a California resident, this section applies to you. In the preceding 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information: identifiers, commercial information, internet or other electronic network activity information, and inferences. For details about the precise data points we collect and the categories of sources of such collection, please see the Collection of Information section above. We collect personal information for the business and commercial purposes described in the Use of Information section above. In the preceding 12 months, we have disclosed the following categories of personal information for business purposes to the following categories of recipients: Link to a text version of this table Medium does not sell your personal information. Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to (1) request to know more about the categories and specific pieces of personal information we collect, use, and disclose about you, (2) request deletion of your personal information, (3) opt out of any sales of your personal information, if we engage in that activity in the future, and (4) not be discriminated against for exercising these rights. You may make these requests by emailing us at  privacy@medium.com  or by completing  this webform . We will verify a webform request by asking you to provide identifying information. We will not discriminate against you if you exercise your rights under the CCPA. If we receive your request from an authorized agent, we may ask for evidence that you have provided such agent with a power of attorney or that the agent otherwise has valid written authority to submit requests to exercise rights on your behalf. This may include requiring you to verify your identity. If you are an authorized agent seeking to make a request, please  contact us . ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES FOR INDIVIDUALS IN EUROPE If you are located in the European Economic Area ( “ EEA ” ), the United Kingdom, or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under applicable law regarding the processing of your personal data, and this section applies to you. Legal Basis for Processing When we process your personal data, we will do so in reliance on the following lawful bases: To perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., providing the products and services you requested). When we have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data to operate our business or protect our interests (e.g., to provide, maintain, and improve our products and services, conduct data analytics, and communicate with you). To comply with our legal obligations (e.g., to maintain a record of your consents and track those who have opted out of non-administrative communications). When we have your consent to do so (e.g., when you opt in to receive non-administrative communications from us). When consent is the legal basis for our processing your personal data, you may withdraw such consent at any time. Data Retention We store personal data associated with your account for as long as your account remains active. If you close your account, we will delete your account data within 14 days. We store other personal data for as long as necessary to carry out the purposes for which we originally collected it and for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. Data Subject Requests Subject to certain limitations, you have the right to request access to the personal data we hold about you and to receive your data in a portable format, the right to ask that your personal data be corrected or erased, and the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. To exercise your rights: If you sign up for a Medium account, you may at any time request an export of your personal information from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app. You may correct information associated with your account from the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app, and the  Customize Your Interests page  to update your interests. You may withdraw consent by deleting your account at any time through the  Settings page , or by going to Settings and then selecting Account within our app (except to the extent Medium is prevented by law from deleting your information). You may object at any time to the use of your personal data by contacting  privacy@medium.com . Questions or Complaints If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority where you reside. Contact details for your Data Protection Authority can be found using the links below: For individuals in the EEA: https://edpb.europa.eu/about-edpb/board/members_en For individuals in the UK: https://ico.org.uk/global/contact-us/ For individuals in Switzerland:  https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/the-fdpic/contact.html CONTACT US If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com . If you are from the EEA or the United Kingdom and have questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us at  privacy@medium.com  or our privacy representatives as follows: Privacy representative for EEA VeraSafe Ireland Ltd. Unit 3D North Point House North Point Business Park New Mallow Road Cork T23AT2P Ireland Or  here . Privacy representative for the United Kingdom VeraSafe United Kingdom Ltd. 37 Albert Embankment London SE1 &TU United Kingdom Or  here . Some rights reserved -- -- More from Medium Policy The Fine Print Read more from    Medium Policy Recommended from Medium Saltmarble The Value of In-Game Currency in Real Life Shehzad Mcm Sonicwall Juck Nxk Community Launch$ 1,000,000 in Prizes! Antiderivative NEW AIRDROP 7,878,787 NCOR tokens | MAY 28TH-JUNE28TH | CORONA CRYPTO Walk2Earn.app New Presale on Unicrypt, Don’t Miss the Last Chance to Join Walk2Earn Metaverse! Weyman Holton in Your Tech Moment™ Flipboard Hack Sheeban Ali Data encapsulation and Data hiding: Charles Timmons My Crusade Against Phishing Emails Part Two: Reporting and the Aftermath (I actually got a response! About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Medium 1.4M Followers Everyone’s stories and ideas Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Get unlimited access Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write George Dillard Follow Oct 7 · 7 min read · Member-only Why are Some of the Most Important Prices Secret? End price opacity! Photo by  Brett Jordan  on  Unsplash I have always hated buying cars. You have to go into the dealership, endure a commissioned salesman’s manipulative mind games, and then haggle over the price. It always feels like the system is designed to make it easier for the dealer to screw me over, and I have been screwed over. The salesman knows more than I do… -- -- 3 More from George Dillard Follow Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also: worldhistoryfacts.com. Buy me a beverage: https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Love podcasts or audiobooks? Learn on the go with our new app. Try Knowable Recommended from Medium Wendie Sun in The Post-Grad Survival Guide Sort Out Your Personal Finance with the Barefoot Steps Tanay Jaipuria The Power of Defaults Veverob Veve Market Fomo — How To Navigate It. Feciat2115 Does an auto loan build good credit? Jari Roomer in Making of a Millionaire This Book Showed Me Financial Independence Is Much Closer Than I Expected Quithe2649 I need the web address for free credit reports. Lane Kawaoka Oct 2020 Monthly Market Update Anesu Ndlovu Can I trust you? About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started George Dillard 1.8K Followers Exploring the past to illuminate politics, the environment, and more. Also:  worldhistoryfacts.com . Buy me a beverage:  https://ko-fi.com/georgedillard Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable Read as much as you want.

