[if lt IE 9]><script charset="UTF-8" src="https://cdn-static-1.medium.com/_/fp/js/shiv.RI2ePTZ5gFmMgLzG5bEVAA.12.js"></script><![endif] Homepage Open in app Sign in Get started ITNEXT ITNEXT is a platform for IT developers & software engineers to share knowledge, connect, collaborate, learn and experience next-gen technologies. About ITNEXT Write for ITNEXT Events & Videos SUMMIT Vacancies @ LINKIT Follow Following What Makes Julia Unique? What Makes Julia Unique? A look at how multiple dispatch distinguishes Julia from all other programming languages Erik Engheim Oct 8 Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode Things to consider to submit Spark Jobs on Kubernetes in cluster mode It is hard to submit spark jobs on kubernetes. As mentioned in the previous post of Hive on Spark in Kubernetes in which it is shown that… Kidong Lee Oct 8 Tutorial: Polymorphism in C Tutorial: Polymorphism in C This tutorial develops examples of polymorphism into a full program, showing why such techniques are useful and how to implement them. Christopher Bazley Oct 8 Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt serverless automation with Oracle Cloud Infrastructure Let’s Encrypt made its debut back in late 2015. It is a free Certificate Authority provided by the Internet Security Research Group. The… Scotti Fletcher Oct 7 Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… Protecting Applications with Kong security plugins and using StatsD to monitor system states — A… One of the issues we all face in current times when developing software is the need and the will to monitor and keep applications in check… João Esperancinha Oct 7 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Adding Elixir to Erlang via Rebar3 Elixir and Erlang are functional programming languages both running on BEAM virtual machine. Programs in both languages get compiled into… Mohammad Molla Oct 7 We are looking for an Azure Devops Automation Engineer Are you looking for a new challenge? Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy Observability strategies to not overload engineering teams — Proxy Strategy A web proxy is a perfect place to start collecting telemetry data without required engineering efforts. Nicolas Takashi Oct 6 Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Quickly Setup Of A Local K8s Cluster Based on kubeadm or k3s, k0s, you choose… Luc Juggery Oct 6 How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose How to Make Exoplayer Lifecycle Aware in Jetpack Compose Tobias Wissmueller Oct 5 A Deep Dive of CVE-2022–33987 (Got allows a redirect to a UNIX socket) Every week, almost without fail, I come across one thing that confuses, entertains, or most commonly infuriates me. I’ve decided to keep a… Chaim Sanders Oct 5 What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? What Makes the Zig Programming Language Unique? Zig lets you run code during compilation. What are the implications? Erik Engheim Oct 5 From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide From Angular to Vue: A simple transition guide I stumbled upon Angular 3 years ago when I started my first job as an Application Development Associate and I have to admit that I totally… Stavros Droutsas Oct 5 About ITNEXT Latest Stories Archive About Medium Terms Privacy