Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write UX Collective 449K Followers Follow Home About Editors' picks Receive our newsletter  Publish a story Caitlin D. Sullivan · Pinned Tracking the impact of UX Research: a framework Why we should measure research (even if no one asks us to). —  It’s easy as a user researcher, designer, or PM to fall into the trap of simply always wanting to learn more about users. But what is the actual value of all our research? At the end of a work week, when I can say, “I really impressed that team with… UX Research 7 min read Robert A Stribley · Pinned Member-only Lefty dentists and inclusive design Left-handed dentists remind us how the environments we learn and work within can have a profound impact upon our lives —  My dentist and I bonded over a shared characteristic recently, when we discovered we’re both left-handed*. This topic came up when he mentioned how he had everything set up to assist him as a southpaw. He said that everything had been set up for right-handed people when he attended dental… Inclusive Design 5 min read J.J. · Pinned 3 things to consider before you implement CAPTCHA for accessibility What are you bothered by the most when you use digital products? For me, it’s e-mail and phone verification, pincode, setting complex passwords and not remembering them… and I especially find one particular thing obnoxious, and it’s CAPTCHA. Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart (CAPTCHA)… UX 4 min read Albertmauri · Pinned Member-only Designing VR UI in Figma and testing it with no code UI has been in constant evolution since 1973 when Xerox Palo Alto Research Center created the first UI as we know it nowadays. Read more about the evolution of UI in this article “UI Evolution: From Computers To Virtual Reality Headsets”. Now, we are facing the next step on UI… Metaverse 6 min read Felipe Dal Molin · Pinned The colors of game design In the past 10 years working with, teaching and consulting on game design, I’ve seen, time and again, teams struggle with some basic aspect of their games’ working. Sometimes it’s a cool theme that doesn’t deliver on gameplay, or a fun core mechanic that doesn’t develop as the game progresses… Game Design 9 min read Eric Chung · Pinned Member-only How Google Search is reinventing itself in 2022 The evolving digital landscape has changed people’s search behaviours forever. —  Google is completely changing the way that search engines operate. Search behaviours encompass much more than simply asking a question and looking for an answer. Often, people don’t have a specific question in mind, but are curious to explore a topic. Or they might be trying to learn something that… Google 7 min read Dave Vronay · Pinned Member-only Designers are worried that Adobe will kill Figma. That might not be a bad thing. With the announcement a few weeks back of Adobe’s intention to purchase Figma, shockwaves went through the design community. … Figma 10 min read Helge Tennø · Pinned Why every designer should be a systems thinker What is systems thinking and how does it add value to a designer’s thinking, methods and practice? These are learnings from my own experience as both a systems thinking practitioner and from up-skilling leadership and teams around the world. —  1. What is a system? A system is a a group of interrelated elements organized towards a shared outcome. e.g. a breakfast table with dishes, utensils and food stuffs is not a system. One does not influence the other. … Systems Thinking 8 min read Jasper Kense · Pinned Now digital humans are here. They sound and look just like us. Digital humans, AI-powered digital counterparts, are going to change how we interact with the world around us. —  In 2016 Miquela Sousa, or @lilmiquela, quickly grew to be one of Instagram's top influencers. At a first glance, there is little wrong with the 19-year-old Brazilian-American model. She enjoys life with friends, goes on fancy holidays and speaks about her skin-care routine. … Technology 6 min read Michael McWatters · Pinned Member-only Shhh. Don’t tell the new designers. Some things they just have to learn for themselves. —  It’s a lot of rectangles. 32% of your time will be spent labeling buttons. Blood will be shed over any question that begins, “Should designers…”. All the research in the world is no match for your CEO’s opinion. Perfect may be the enemy of the good, but that won’t stop… Design 3 min read Get started We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design.  https://linktr.ee/uxc  ·  451K followers Follow Connect with    UX Collective Editors Fabricio Teixeira Designer at Work & Co, Founder of UX Collective — http://twitter.com/fabriciot Follow Caio Braga designer @ Momentive.ai, editor @ UX Collective Follow Sign up for The UX Collective Newsletter By UX Collective A weekly resourceful newsletter that helps designers stay in the know, be productive, and think more critically about their work.     Take a look. Get this newsletter By signing up, you will create a    Medium    account if you don’t already have one. Review our     Privacy Policy     for more information about our privacy practices. Medium    sent you an email at     to complete your subscription. Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable