Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write Published in UX Collective Matt Owens Follow Apr 22, 2021 · 17 min read Save What are your design maxims? A few things I have learned along the way about design and business that have stood the test of time. My design career — if I can call it that — has now spanned multiple decades. The first thing I created that I would consider a proper design was a seven-inch record for a friend’s band sometime in the ’90s. By the early 2000s, I was designing websites. By the end of the 2000s, I was building brands. In the 2010’s I was growing a business and learning about the power of strategy and process. As we enter the 2020’s, I’m leveraging my learnings of the last few decades to grow more as a person, explore new things, and to find the adjacent possibilities that a career in design has afforded me — like writing this article. The maxims below are by no means universal truths but they are some of the most important things I have learned. I hope they might help you on your creative journey. Typography is everything The value of good typography within the discipline of graphic design cannot be understated. Type can make or break everything else and knowing how to wield typography effectively can separate good work from great work. When it comes to typography, designers need to be good at two things: typeface selection and typeface usage within a design itself. Good typeface selection requires that you know what good typefaces are and where to find them. A contemporary graphic designer must care deeply about type and, like a record collector, must have good taste and know the nuances and interrelatedness between the subject matter being designed and a typeface and type system that is most applicable and expressive for the purpose at hand. Great contemporary type foundries such as  Pangram Pangram ,  Blaze ,  Displaay ,  General Type Studio ,  Florian Karsten ,  Edition.studio  are just a handful of small type foundries that do not get enough credit for the craft required to develop typefaces that allow a great design solution to be brought to life by a capable graphic designer. Without great type designers we do not have great graphic designers. There are timeless typefaces ( Garamond ,  Helvetica ), trendy typefaces (remember when  Brown  was all the rage?) and everything in between. And what is fresh and not overused today will be no longer fresh and overused tomorrow. Keeping on top of your ability to utilize type both compositionally, creatively, and legibly while also having a passion and awareness for new faces coming out is crucial. In the funny recent  John Mayer interview with Kerwin Frost  ( skip to 25:10 in ) Mayer talks about how free fonts are “bullshit” and that when you see a free font used on a record cover or site you can tell. John goes on to say that spending the money on a great typeface is about investing in quality and when you use a substandard free typeface “your brain doesn’t know it but your heart can tell.” I’m not terribly familiar with Mr. Mayer’s musical oeuvre, but I am happy to see someone that produces popular music with a broad appeal encapsulate why great typography matters when you are making things that go out in the world that do cultural work like music. As John says; “Just buy the font!.” Good taste is very hard to teach and even harder to master I have found that every designer has their own personal taste that informs how they approach design. Your taste is the product of your experiences as well as the depth and breadth of your inspirations and influences. One’s personal taste is not always the right sensibility for every client project, so the challenge is to leverage your own taste while also understanding what good taste is for the work you are doing. Personal taste is impossible to teach: it comes from how you see the world. Good taste in the context of the design discipline is one’s ability to bring beauty and sophistication to a design approach while also making it right for the client’s needs  and  making it resonate in a way that is considered contemporary and stunning at this moment in time. You need to do this while also using your personal taste as a filter. This dance between what you like, what the world of good design right now looks like, and what is right for the client is unique for every designer. Solving this complex equation simply requires good taste which can only be found through your own creative curiosity and will. That said, it helps to be around other designers that have good taste. Working alongside very talented people will encourage you to push your own abilities and your  Ways of Seeing . You have to be a good observer and a good curator of your own aesthetic impulses. When I think of good taste, I immediately think of the Italian fashion entrepreneur  Alessandro Squarzi . Mr Squarzi has good taste and you can see by  his Instagram  how he is able to combine a complex cultural vocabulary that mixes Pitti Uomo vibes with American vintage and military all wrapped up in his own personal aesthetic. His good taste is the product of a lifetime in fashion honing his craft. Graphic designers seek this same level of aesthetic balance and it is something you can only learn by being relentlessly inspired. As a brand example, I consider  Manual Creative’s work for Stava  and  Athletics’ work for Citrix  as exemplary examples of good taste at work. Both projects show a level of sophistication, restraint and a reverence for the client and their mission that only comes from having a firm handle on how to wield good taste to bring a great brand to life. Leadership comes from within If there is anything I have learned about business in the last 25 years is that not everyone wants to lead projects. Leading is a big responsibility, and there are always a great deal of unknowns. It can be scary, and on top of that when you lead, people assume that you have the right answer, which is often not the case. A metaphor I use is imagining a good leader to be like a guide in the woods. An experienced guide is better than an inexperienced one, but there is no guarantee that you will not make a wrong turn or get lost. The leader is working to find the right path out of the proverbial creative woods even if it requires a detour, repelling off of a cliff, or running from bears. In this way, a good leader facilitates and provides direction while also taking on accountability for the project outcome. When it comes to design for me there is a simple difference that grows in your mind when you want to be a leader; you go from wanting to “make” something specific to wanting to “solve” something larger. Making something is fun. When you “make” there is no right or wrong answer. I love making things. I love exploring ideas. But this is different from being driven to solve a larger problem and leading. As a true project leader you are trying to arrive at the right solution through the making of the team. You are working to identify all of the contingencies and potential pitfalls. Why is this important? Well, when doing a project for money you have to get to an end point where the client feels they have received what they paid for and the team has to feel they have done their job to the best of their ability. Real leaders are making sure this outcome is always top of mind every step of the way. I think that some people are more wired to lead than others and I would put them into two groups. One group is the kind of person that gets a biography on the History Channel, a person that is very passionate and driven about an idea and is often very self-involved and weird. There are countless leaders that we can name where talent, vision and personal hubris are all blended into one. These are the kind of people that are often seen as larger-than-life. To be honest, I’m not really into this kind of leader archetype because it puts one person in the spotlight as the sole author, which as we all know is total BS. To do great things takes more than one person’s vision, and I think it is an unfair and biased assumption to believe one person has all the answers. It discounts all the other folks making the project happen and doing the hard work. The other kind of leader is driven to be in service of the work and the idea and not by their ego. Everyone who leads wants to solve problems, but the great leaders are the ones that never tire of the journey to get there. I have had the great fortune to work with a handful of people that are brilliantly creative and a few of those people are also leaders. The creative leaders I know that are exceptional are able to masterfully balance their craft of making with the many dependencies that leadership requires to solve bigger problems. They are both creator and manager. Maker and solver. Leader and soldier. I truly admire this type of leader because they remain close to the work and know the sweat and pain that is required to bring great things to life. For those interested in learning about a designer’s journey as a leader I highly recommend the  Frequencies podcast: Unity without Uniformity with Gretel’s Head of Design Dylan Mulvaney The ability to write and articulate your creative thinking is critical As you grow as a designer, you will come to find that your work will not speak for itself as much as you hope it will. Other people are not you and they will always have their own interpretation of what is presented. As humans we see the world through our own lens of preferences and experiences which makes the whole world of aesthetics quite subjective. When you are developing brands this subjectivity can be very frustrating. Someone, a client for example, may not have the same caliber of good taste as you and may fall in love with an idea that you feel is not as good as the idea you have. The only way to resolve this subjective preference is through written and verbal argument. You have to be able to show a client how their subjective preferences will negatively impact the outcome of the project. If you do not do this then it is just a subjective discussion about personal taste and you will agree to disagree and there will be a stalemate. This is a really important thing to understand — you have to be able to convince non-visual people to appreciate and understand the verbal rationalization of your creative work so that they can see your thinking in the work itself. You must show them the light and you must not only convince them your idea is better, you must also explain how your idea ties into business goals and the bottom line. As a graphic designer you have to be able to do this verbally in a meeting, in short form for a presentation, and in long form as an email. I have found that this is the only way to ensure that your idea that may not be subjectively preferred will be understood as the objectively superior solution. Solitude and collaboration need one another I have spent literally thousands of hours in front of the computer working on design things. Hours upon hours fussing with type, adjusting keyframes, rendering, making a million different logo versions — you name it. I have largely done this kind of work alone or with headphones on shutting out the outside world. This deep work was something that only solitude could afford me and it has been indispensable in getting better at my craft. The fewer distractions I have had the more I have learned. Over the years I have found that solitary work is only good up to a certain point. You can go too deep and turn into a creative version of  Colonel Kurtz  from  Apocalypse Now  if you don’t have other people to bounce ideas off of. Collaboration means to work together, but it also means to “labor with.” As a designer, we are never really “working together” as much as we are laboring alongside one another toward a common goal. We are supporting each other in our individual isolation to work through an idea and we are seeking solace and guidance from each other in our struggle to make something really good. Many years ago I had a creative partner, exceptionally talented, but they had to do things their way no matter what anyone said. They had to take a path and I had to let them fail or succeed on their terms and in their own time. I wanted more than anything to give them “the answer” but they always had to find it themselves, even if it was the same place I wanted to go. I found this to be incredibly frustrating, but years later I realized that even though we were supposedly working together we were really laboring alongside one another and it was as meaningful to just be there on the sidelines as support and as a cheerleader instead of giving answers. Don’t confuse the design scene with design work I’m a design fan. Always have been. What has remained the most captivating to me, be it design, illustration or art, is the work itself. I’m always drawn to creative work that inspires me and goads me to work harder and be better. As you grow in your career you meet fellow designers and may become a member of any number of design organizations like AIGA or D&AD. These organizations can be a great way to make connections and possibly win awards. These are all good things, but like a juicy Twitter thread, they can take up a lot of time when you probably should be designing. The metaphor I like to use is that being a race car driver is very different from being a member of a race car fan club. Creative agencies are like race car companies, they are designed for performance. Design organizations are more like fan clubs, they are designed to support and celebrate the output of agency work. I have certainly been a design groupie, wanting to meet some of my design heroes at a conference or speaking engagement, but this is a very temporal thing. Ultimately the most meaningful and lasting creative relationships I have had have been through working on projects or though deeper interactions with my design colleagues cultivated over years. It’s totally okay to be a design super fan, but your own work should come first. Spending too much of your energy “in the scene,” be it online or in person, can be immediately fulfilling but it is not a replacement for making work and improving your skills. Without great creative work you are just a spectator. Among some designers there is also a visceral desire to be validated by your peers. Reaching for the design limelight can be a fleeting exercise and being a design celebrity, whatever that means, is a tricky thing to want to be.  Wanting popularity  by its nature is kind of selfish and odd and is often a byproduct of something within you that is not about the actual work you create. Wanting your work to be recognized and appreciated is a natural thing to want, but it is only through doing great work that you can gain that recognition. In addition to great work, there are a number of other factors that might come into play — being at the right place at the right time, doing something for a person or organization in culture that is highly popular and getting that “afterglow,” luck, marketing, etc. To seek out creative validation can often come off as self serving or insincere. Appreciating it when it comes is a sweeter reward. Just remember that the work is the thesis. Taking the time to do amazing work is hard and is the only true path. The rest will follow. The more context you have the better decisions you make As a designer, understanding the bigger picture of an industry and the goals and needs of your client specifically is crucial and serves as an important input to make better creative decisions. Here is a simple example: If a direct competitor to your client uses blue as a primary brand color maybe you should not use blue, even if you really like blue. You would not know to make this color decision unless you knew who the direct competitor to your client was. Context is the key to helping you make this informed creative decision. Context also helps designers to avoid designing in a vacuum and can give you the information a client’s CEO and CMO need to hear so that they can rationalize your creative solution and agree that it is an appropriate one. This sounds like common sense, but it is surprisingly uncommon. Designers get caught up in the making and can overlook something very practical, either in the work itself, or in the industry the client serves, that can negatively impact or even negate a great idea in the eyes of the client. Remember to do your homework and be able to succinctly articulate the challenges of the industry or category of your client, the specific things your client needs to solve, and how your design decisions solve these problems. My latest go-to for great industry context and insight is the email newsletter  Off Kilter  written by veteran brand strategist and former Head of Strategy at Wolff Olins New York  Paul Worthington . Paul is passionate about his work and equally passionate about understanding the larger trends and decisions happening in business that impact global brands. Off Kilter is very smart and rye and provides a compact distillation of some of the bigger movements happening in business as it relates to brand. Charge what it is worth How you bill for design work has never been a perfect formula. There are many factors. The three questions I always ask myself is “will it make you rich?”, “will it make you famous?” or “will it make you happy?” I have found that if you are not happy at the end of the project, the other two factors don’t matter as much. Happiness is the end goal for every project, but money does matter. Exchanging creative services for a competitive fee creates a contractual formality that encourages both parties to play by the rules and to respect one another more. If you are charging what your time and expertise are truly worth, you and your team will put in the extra level of effort to deliver, and the client will expect that same level of effort from you and respect the work you create. On occasion I have done work for less money because I really wanted to do the project. But in doing this, more often or not, I became dissatisfied and there was a little voice in my head feeling that they should be more appreciative and accept ideas “as is” because they were getting a deal. This put me in the wrong mindset to do my best work and opened up both parties to more subjective and emotional decision making. I have found that it is almost impossible to do great work for someone else if economically you feel you are being taken advantage of and if the client feels they are getting a deal. Never stop learning and never stop making mistakes Learning new skills is as fundamental as talent. We are forever students. The fundamentals of design are timeless, but the creative industry is always changing. As culture, technology, and our society evolves, so does the work of the designer. There is a kind of unspoken  Moore’s Law  about design. I believe design advances in a noticeable way about every 18 months keeping pace with software and business processes. Along with change comes making mistakes. You have to do a lot of wrong to get to what’s right. I don’t think there are any short cuts. Embracing change and making mistakes is at least fifty percent of a designer’s job. The sooner you realize this and embrace it the more fun your work can be. You can’t fight change. You have to accept it and lean into it. I would rather see someone try a weird new idea and fail than just show me something I’ve seen before. I’m always excited when someone shows me a new piece of software or a new trend in process. The closer we get to what we think is right the further it moves away from us. It is this forward momentum that keeps things fresh, new, and energized. The farther I go the less I know One foot goes in front of the other It all boils down To not hang around To keep moving In front of the gravity, gravity, gravity, gravity The answer is there, the answer is there But there is not a fixed position It keeps moving along and I keep coming along That’s why I’m a long distance runner, runner, runner, runner And if I stop to catch my breath I might catch a piece of death I can’t keep your pace If I want to finish this race My fight’s not with you It’s with the gravity -  Fugazi , Long distance runner Hard Work Pays Off I’m not a Crossfit person, but I am familiar with five-time Crossfit Champion  Matt Fraser  who has just retired from competition. Before winning the CrossFit Games consecutively from 2016–2020, Matt had a long path having broken two vertebrae before the Junior World Weightlifting Championship in 2009. After experimental back surgery he built himself back up, one day at a time, over 7 years to win his first Crossfit Games. I like Matt’s story (his  Joe Rogan episode  is a good listen) because it is a perfect testament to the old adage that hard work pays off #HWPO. It really does. Like an athlete, Being a really talented designer takes time. It requires you to do countless unglamorous design iterations and create countless wrong ideas to eventually gain experience and mastery to get to the right ideas. Young designers starting out often fail to understand this. It is unlikely that you will significantly improve as a designer if you limit your activity to your day job. To creatively excel is to learn passionately and to spend the thousands of hours needed to improve, mature, and get better. This may sound terrible, but if you love something and you want to be good at it time does not matter. You have to put in your reps to perfect your craft. Plain and simple. I was listening to an Instagram Live interview with one of my favorite creative studios  Young Jerks , and they touched on a really specific dimension of hard work. Someone asked: “How do you get your skill level up to your taste level?” This is such a simple and brilliant question that everyone that wants to be better asks themselves. The only answer is practice. And practice takes time and hard work. I have agonized over typeface selection, final colors, formal decisions, kerning, you name it. Why? Because I could feel that the work could be better. I could sense it and if I pushed further I could find it. This feeling has never left me. Those magical moments that take your idea from its creation to then have that idea live beyond you and be experienced and positively impact others can be a really profound thing. It’s what every great song is about, it’s what great design is about. Hard work does not guarantee moments of brilliance, it just sets the stage for it to be more likely to happen. I hope the above maxims might be helpful to you. They have helped me navigate the ups and downs of my creative and professional work, but what one believes to be true is always a work in progress. Thanks for reading. The UX Collective donates US$1 for each article published on our platform. This story contributed to  Bay Area Black Designers : a professional development community for Black people who are digital designers and researchers in the San Francisco Bay Area. By joining together in community, members share inspiration, connection, peer mentorship, professional development, resources, feedback, support, and resilience. Silence against systemic racism is not an option. Build the design community you believe in. -- -- 4 More from UX Collective Follow We believe designers are thinkers as much as they are makers. Curated stories on UX, Visual & Product Design. https://linktr.ee/uxc ·  451K followers Read more from    UX Collective Recommended from Medium sewingmachine 8 Best Cheap Sewing Machine — Reviews & Buying Guide Nitin Pal Unlock your productivity with the laws of UX Mina Pêcheux in Geek Culture A low-poly knight 3D model! Gelisa Cisneros Top 5 Free Assets Kait Silva Forsythe in Lyft Design+ What I learned as a user experience research intern at Lyft Saatvik Agrawal in Bootcamp Rethinking India’s most popular cab service in 24 hours — a UX Case Study on OLA Cabs arionkoder Is a design sprint the right choice for your digital product? Canvs Editorial in UX Collective Storyboarding: The art of storytelling in UX About Help Terms Privacy Get the Medium app Get started Matt Owens 278 Followers Creative and Project Leader, Partner at Athletics Follow Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable