Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Get started
Get started
Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Start Writing
Get started
Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Publish, grow, and earn, all in one place.
Download our app so you can read, write, and publish wherever you are.
If you have a story to tell, knowledge to share, or a perspective to offer — welcome home. Here, your writing can thrive in a network supported by millions of readers — not ads.
Start Writing
Get started
Explore publishing tools
Create your space.
Tell your story your way — with different ways to write, style, and brand your work.
Blogs.
If you’re an individual writer,  your profile  is a personalized home for your writing. Brand your space and share your writing with readers who care what you have to say.
Flexible expression.
Write something short and sweet or long and deep, once a week or once a month.
Newsletters.
Reach readers in their inboxes. Gain new subscribers and export them to take wherever you go.  Here's how to get started.
Publications.
Collaborate with others or publish under a brand name. Use our story submission system and expressive customization options.
Custom domains.
Coming soon
Add a custom domain name to your space to help visitors find, share, and return to it.
Find and grow your audience.
With simple tools and features, you have the chance to connect with millions of curious readers.
Followers.
Readers who follow you will see your latest writing in their feeds, keeping them up-to-date and engaged with your work.
Responses.
Have direct conversations with your audience without leaving your story’s page. Responses are displayed in-context, unifying your writing and the discussions happening around it.
Connect to Twitter.
Link your account to Twitter so your network can find and follow you on Medium. You'll also be able to discover other writers you already follow on Twitter.  Learn more.
Writer stats.
Built-in analytics let you see what’s working. Dig into the details on every story or view the big picture to learn what resonates and maximize your presence.
Earn money from your writing.
When you publish on Medium, you can join the Partner Program to earn money by making your stories part of our member-only content. Or you can keep your stories free and accessible to anyone. The choice is yours.
Learn about the Partner Program
Learn more
Good ideas need spaces to take shape before they can take off. So we built Medium to make it easier for more people to read, write and explore ideas together. That’s why we’re an open platform 20,000 people use to share their expertise and experiences every day. It’s also why we’re a publisher, creating the stories 150-million Medium readers are asking for. And why we work with well-known authors, magazines and newspapers to help more people find great thinking that expands their perspective.
A place to think,  “I never thought of that.”
Find writing from world-class publications and undiscovered voices that dive into the heart of the matter—no matter the topic—to bring new ideas to the surface.
The Atlantic
Scott Galloway
OneZero
Roxane Gay
Devon Price
New York Magazine
Your Fat Friend
Forge
GEN
Ryan Holiday
Elemental
Markham Heid
150-million readers and growing.
“Medium is truly where ideas are born, shared, and spread.”
“Medium is truly where ideas are born, shared, and spread.”
“Medium is truly where ideas are born, shared, and spread.”
Jasmine Bina
Jack Preston King
Joel Leon
←
→
Explore all we have. Without limits.
Become a member to see every story on Medium, support the writers who publish their best work here, and get access to all our tools to create and promote your own ideas.
See membership options
Think anywhere.
Our app brings the full Medium experience wherever you are, so you can read, write and publish even when you’re offline.
See where Medium can take you.
Start exploring
More about publishing on Medium:
How do I start writing on Medium?
↓
First, make a  free account . Then, to create a story, click on your profile picture in the top-right corner of the page, then “Write a Story.” To start a publication, click on your profile picture in the top-right corner of the page, then click “Publications,” then “New publication.”
Who writes on Medium?
↓
Anyone can write on Medium. Whether you’ve never written before or are ready to create a full publication, it’s easy to get started and we allow you to focus more on big ideas and less on driving clicks. With the option to earn for your work, you can also be directly rewarded for the value you provide readers.
How can I make money writing on Medium?
↓
If you join the  Medium Partner Program , you can earn money based on how much time Medium members spend reading your stories.
Do I need to be in the Partner Program to write on Medium?
↓
No. Joining the Partner Program is free, optional, and you can choose to join or leave at any time. If you are in the Partner Program you can also choose which of the stories you publish are eligible for the Program. For more about the Partner Program,  click here .
Who can read the work I publish on Medium?
↓
Anyone on the internet can read your stories. Even if your story is being distributed in the Partner Program as a part of our  metered paywall , anyone can still read a limited number of articles for free each month. If you want to share an un-metered version of your story, you can use a  Friend Link .
How can I see how my stories perform?
↓
Your  stats dashboard  lets you see how your story is performing and gives you valuable insights into your readers, including where they came from and what they’re interested in, so you can grow your audience.
Where I can I get updates and plug into the creator community?
↓
For the latest guides, resources, and inspiration for creators on Medium, follow  Creators Hub , the official Medium blog for writers.
How can I grow my audience with Medium?
↓
Medium has a number of tools to connect you with over 170 million readers on the platform and beyond. Some ways you can build your audience are by  starting a newsletter ,   submitting to publications ,  following the distribution standards , and  sharing your stories  on social media. We also encourage you to check out our blog,  3 Minute Read , for more helpful tips and tricks – like  how to write a great headline  and  SEO tips to make your stories more discoverable .
About
Terms
Privacy
[if lte IE 9]><script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/placeholders/3.0.2/placeholders.min.js"></script><![endif]