Open in app Home Notifications Lists Stories Write 108K Followers Follow Home About Creators Hub Scott Lamb · Sep 21 Updates on Medium’s distribution system Clarity on how distribution works, and a change to notifications —  One of our most important jobs here at Medium is to connect readers with valuable stories. We’re always updating and improving our system to do that crucial job better. Today, we’re taking a minute to clarify how distribution on Medium works. Until recently, our distribution system was binary, where some… Medium 2 min read Alex Benzer · Sep 9 Android Audio and Homepage Topics New updates to help you get more value from your reading time —  Your time matters. That’s why our team is committed to helping you get the most out of the time you spend reading on Medium. This means helping you find stories that are relevant to your interests and goals; knowledge that goes beyond entertainment to positively impact your life. … Medium 3 min read Medium Staff · Aug 29 It Happened on Medium: The First 10 Years A somewhat complete history of our first decade, and the stories that got us talking, thinking, and sharing —  Medium turned 10 this month. A decade ago, we built a place on the internet for stories that aren’t too long or too short, but… that in-between length. Our simple, beautiful publishing tools gave you the freedom to focus on your words, and our platform connected you with other readers… Medium 13 min read Breana Jones · Aug 24 Custom Domains, Mobile Editor, and a True Following Feed Working towards an innovative product you can rely on —  A big part of our work at Medium centers around earning and building trust with you, our readers, and creators. We want to be clear where we can and we want to build in public with you. In that vein, we have a couple of announcements to share. Custom Domains are back for good We first… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Breana Jones · Aug 5 Make Medium Yours It’s now easier to own your experience —  Hola readers and creators, I’m back to share more updates! I mentioned in my last 3MR that we value listening to you, and we make changes based on your feedback. One thing we’ve heard is that you aren’t always satisfied with the recommendations you see on your homepage. That’s something… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Alex Benzer · Aug 3 Introducing Tipping on Medium (beta) Add a customizable tipping button to your stories and start receiving direct support from your readers. —  “How can we make writing more sustainable and rewarding?” That question has always been top of mind for our team here at Medium. Our philosophy is that great writing deserves visibility and financial support, and that idea underpins how we’re already helping creators earn money via our Partner Program and… Medium 2 min read Breana Jones · Aug 2 Listening shows up in the details A few changes that wouldn’t normally deserve their own blog post. —  Recently we’ve started being more clear about how much we value listening to our community. Or as our new CEO Tony Stubblebine says, : “Help mold the future of Medium by telling us what is important to you.” I’m one of the people who wants to hear from you. Seriously… 3 Minute Reads 3 min read Sandee Roston · Jul 12 Medium names technology and digital media veteran Tony Stubblebine CEO; founder Ev Williams transitions to Chairman of the Board Medium announced today that Tony Stubblebine will become Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors, effective July 20, 2022. Medium founder and Chief Executive Officer Ev Williams will transition to the newly-created role of chairman of the board. Ev Williams founded Medium in 2012, and has… Medium 2 min read Tony Stubblebine · Jul 12 Hello Medium readers, authors, editors and publishers I’m the new CEO. —  There are so many different reasons to read Medium and so many different reasons to publish on Medium. We are a very large community consisting of hundreds of millions of readers and many thousands of authors. That is our strength. I know this because I’ve been deeply involved with Medium… 3 min read Alex Benzer · May 16 Listen to stories anytime, anywhere. Audio is now on iOS. Today, following the success of audio on the Medium website, we’re rolling out the feature to our iOS app. Making it easy to soak up new ideas is the heart of Medium’s mission — and now that’s more convenient than ever. … Medium 3 min read Get started The official Medium blog Follow Connect with    3 min read Editors Medium Staff News and updates from the staff at Medium. Follow Alex Benzer Director of Product @ Medium Follow Warren Shaeffer vp @medium, co-founder @knowablefyi, 3x co-founder (human + biz), very lucky, medium funny. wip. Follow See all Help Status Writers Blog Careers Privacy Terms About Knowable