Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Get started
Get started
Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Get started
Get started
Our story
Membership
Write
Sign in
Every idea needs a
.
The best ideas can change who we are. Medium is where those ideas take shape, take off, and spark powerful conversations. We’re an open platform where over 100 million readers come to find insightful and dynamic thinking. Here, expert and undiscovered voices alike dive into the heart of any topic and bring new ideas to the surface. Our purpose is to spread these ideas and deepen understanding of the world. We’re creating a new model for digital publishing. One that supports nuance, complexity, and vital storytelling without giving in to the incentives of advertising. It’s an environment that’s open to everyone but promotes substance and authenticity. And it’s where deeper connections forged between readers and writers can lead to discovery and growth. Together with millions of collaborators, we’re building a trusted and vibrant ecosystem fueled by important ideas and the people who think about them.
A living network of curious minds.
Anyone can write on Medium. Thought-leaders, journalists, experts, and individuals with unique perspectives share their thinking here. You’ll find pieces by independent writers from around the globe, stories we feature and leading authors, and smart takes on our own suite of blogs and publications.
Erica Dhawan
Scott Galloway
OneZero
Sarah Cottrell
Devon Price
Kaki Okumura
Carvell Wallace
Forge
GEN
Hal H. Harris
Elemental
LEVEL
Over 100 million readers and growing.
"There’s no other place that combines such an excellent level of writing with a truly engaged and active community. Medium is truly where ideas are born, shared, and spread."
Jasmine Bina
"Medium is trying to shift the paradigm. They’re catering to those looking for fresh, new, authentic voices. I believe wholeheartedly in their mission."
Joel Leon
"Medium is a great place to read and learn from a wide range of authors. It’s not muddied up by ads. It feels like one of the few pure places to go online."
Jackie Colburn
Create the space for your thinking to take off.
A blank page is also a door. At Medium you can walk through it. It's easy and free to share your thinking on any topic, connect with an audience, express yourself with a range of publishing tools, and even earn money for your work.
Write on Medium
Get more with membership.
Become a Medium member to enjoy unlimited access and directly support the writers you read most.
See membership options
Read as much as you want.
Enjoy unlimited access to every story across all of your devices.
Reward quality content.
Your membership helps us pay writers, and keeps your experience ad-free.
Take Medium with you.
Download our app so you can read wherever you are.
Learn more about us. Or join us.
The Medium blog
Visit our company blog for the latest news, product updates, and tips and tricks.
Read our blog
Work at Medium
Our team is home to engineers, journalists, artists, and creatives of all stripes.
View open positions
Read, write, and expand your world.
Get started
Terms
Privacy
Help
[if lte IE 9]><script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/placeholders/3.0.2/placeholders.min.js"></script><![endif]