You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Get the app Try for free Listen. Learn. Level up. Learn today’s most in-demand skills with actionable, podcast-style lessons from top experts. Join 40,000+ founders, professionals, creators, and ambitious know-it-alls getting smarter on the go. Try for free Featured by: Popular courses More popular courses Nutrition Plant-Based Performance Chris Paul, NBA All-Star Chris Paul teaches lessons on plant-based eating and explains how transforming his diet transformed his game. He's joined by a team of chefs and academics to explore the possibilities of simple, healthful plant-based nutrition and inspire elite and armchair athletes alike to change their minds about green eating. View course Startups Launch a Startup Alexis Ohanian, Reddit co-founder Starting a company is hard in the best of times. Starting one today might seem downright impossible. It's not. Era-defining businesses like Instagram, Slack, and Uber were all born into down economies. And even as the world turns upside-down, new opportunities are emerging for smart entrepreneurs. In this course, Reddit’s Alexis Ohanian, Everlane’s Michael Preysman, and a team of Silicon Valley experts teach you how to responsibly prepare for the possibilities and challenges of building your own company. They’ll walk you through the steps of launching a high-growth startup and provide you with winning strategies for drafting your business plan, securing funding, developing your product, and much more. View course Leadership How to Dream, Lead, and Achieve Scott Kelly, NASA astronaut “If you can dream it, you can do it.” As an engineer, naval aviator, record-setting astronaut, and commander of the International Space Station, Scott Kelly has lived his life by these words. In this candid and entertaining course, Scott shares instructive stories from his childhood in New Jersey, his days as a US Navy test pilot, and his year hurtling around the globe at 17,500 MPH and teaches hard-earned lessons on perseverance, mental fortitude, mission-readiness, and personal motivation drawn from his experiences in the most competitive, extreme environments imaginable. View course Wellness The Pursuit of Happier Kristen Meinzer, writer The self-help industry is worth over a billion dollars, but advice from celebrities and stars doesn’t always stick. And now, more than ever, happiness feels very out of reach. So, in this course, we turn to academics, researchers, and scientists who give it to us straight — how can we be happy? Host and self-help skeptic Kristen Meinzer leads the search for what actually makes us a little stronger, a little more fulfilled, and a little happier. View course Leadership Your Network Is Your Net Worth Chris Lyons of Andreessen Horowitz As a Managing Partner at Andreessen Horowitz, Chris Lyons’s job relies on the strength of his network and his ability to leverage it to create new opportunities for his company and the founders he works with every day. Early in Chris’s career, one of his mentors, Silicon Valley pioneer Ken Coleman, shared a piece of advice he’ll never forget: “Your network is your net worth.” In other words: business is all about relationships. Being great at your job only gets you halfway there. Your network — and by extension your reputation — gets you the rest of the way. In this course, Chris shares what he’s learned over the years to help you build a more powerful, impactful network that can help accelerate your career. View course Confidence Speak with Confidence Celeste Headlee, TED speaker and author Whether you're nervous speaking publicly, anxious in social settings, or just want to get ahead at work, learning the techniques of effective communication will change the way you approach every interaction. Join master communicators, speechwriters, and vocal coaches as they teach you how to speak in any setting, from presenting to clients, to giving a wedding toast, to schmoozing at dinner parties. View course Cooking How to Eat Now Mark Bittman, bestselling food writer and former NYT columnist Designed for busy people, this course is celebrated food writer Mark Bittman’s guide to being an eater in the modern world. Bittman reveals his vision for the future of food and shares his best advice—and plenty of new insights—for cooking and eating healthfully and sustainably. You’ll also hear from chef Holly Haines about dining with company. After just four hours, you’ll be equipped to eat better, cook more often, and savor the good life in a truly sustainable way. View course Power tip People like to follow people way more than they like to follow brands. Elon Musk has 43M followers on Twitter, Tesla has 7M. ~ Nick Martell from  Branding for Founders Smarties around the world love Knowable Ready to jump in? Get the free app ©   2022    Knowable • Home Log in Subscribe Help & FAQ Terms Privacy