Suraj Janakiraman
09-04-2022
CS 4395.001 Human Language Technologies
											Overview of Homework 1

1. Description of the program
A) Description: This program processes text within a csv file using Python. 
(B) data.csv is the file that the program will process. data.csv is an input file with 5 fields (last name, first name, middle initial, ID, and Office Phone). 
The program is supposed to modify the invalid fields so that they become valid. Examples of modification of fields include: 
  (B1) Modify the first character of first and last names to have a capital letter followed by lowercase (i.e. Jake Jason)
  (B2) Modify the middle initial such that it is a capital letter. If there is no middle initial, make sure to replace the empty middle initial string with 'X'
  (B3) Modify the ID: An ID is supposed to have 2 letters followed by 4 digits. The program uses regular expressions to check if an ID is valid or not. 
  (B4) Modify the phone number: A phone number is supposed to be in the following format 123-456-7890. The program should use regular expressions to check and see whether the
	phone number is valid or not. 

(C) How does the program work?
(C1) When the user runs Homework1_sxj170022.py, the program process information within the data.csv, and looks for invalid fields. 
(C2) If an invalid field is found, the console will print a message (i.e. ID invalid: 54454. ID is two letters followed by 4 digits. Please enter a valid ID: ). 
In the example,the user is asked to enter a valid ID after being told that the ID is invalid. 
If the invalid field is a phone number, the console prints the following message (i.e. Phone 555-877.4321 is invalid. Enter phone number in form 123-456-7890). 
The user is asked to enter a phone number in the form 123-456-7890. 
(C3) All the invalid fields will be flagged by the console until the user enters in the correct information for all Person objects. 

(D) File structure: 
(D1) Homework1_sxj170022.py: This program is responsible for reading in information from the data.csv file, performing the regular expression operations for the fields in 
the data.csv file, and outputting the information to a command line terminal.The program uses a dictionary to store all the fields from the data.csv file. 
(D2) PersonClass.py: This program is responsible for creating a Person object with the following fields as listed in data.csv file 
(last name, first name, middle initial, ID, and phone number). This program also has a method to display the Person objects. 
(D3) homework1_config.py: This program is used to store the file names in variables so that the file names do not have to be hardcoded every time they need to be referenced. 


2. Explain how to run the program
(A) You will see a folder called HomeworkAssignment1. Underneath that, you will see the following files, Homework1_sxj170022.py, PersonClass.py,  homework1_config.py, and a data folder
containing data.csv file. Download these files and put them in a working directory. 
(B) Once a working directory is in place, Run the following command: 
	(B1) If you have python3 run the following command: python main.py . [Note that the dot . comes after python main.py, that is the 3rd argument you need to put in to run the file. 
The full command to be run is python main.py . (note: please include the . when you run the program). A screenshot of output will be uploaded so that you can refer to that to run the file. 


3. Describe the strengths/weaknesses of Python in text processing. 
(S1) Python requires less code as opposed to languages such as Java or C++ to process files. 
For example, there is no need for Python to provide a .set function to set the value or a .get function to get a value in a Class. As such, there is no need for Python to store a field 
inside of a .set function as opposed to storing fields in Java and C++. This aspect makes reading Python code that processes text more readable and understandable.
(S2) Processing a regular expression is as easy as hardcoding the regular expression. 
That said there are some major weaknesses in processing text in Python: 
(W1): Python is limited to only a few data structures (lists, dicts, tuples, and sets) as opposed to the data structures in Java and C++ (Hash Map, LinkedList, Array List, Array,
Queue, Binary Trees, Binary Search Trees, Heaps, Graphs, Stacks, etc.  
(W2):  Out of all the Python data structures (list, dicts, tuples, sets), it is easiest to process text and store the fields in the text using a list. 


4. Write about what you learned in this assignment or what was a review for you. 
(A) Python treats every variable as an object. As opposed to Java or C++ for example, Python does not require the programmer to provide the data type for the variable (i.e. int x=5). 
Simply typing in x=5 is good enough for Python.
(B) I learned that I could hardcode a Python regular expression and that regular expression does the processing for the specific field I am processing. 
For example, (i.e. re.match('\d{3}-\d{3}-\d{4}', phone) checks to see if the phone number is in the form 123-456-7890. 



